Native string interpolation syntax (#570)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: proposals/0570-string-interpolation.rst

Reviewer: @brandonchinn178
I included it in that thread because I don't think it was considered in the vote.
There are 3 orthogonal ideas here (2 and 3 work with some of the other ideas), I will try to present them individually:

### 1. Heterogeneous lists
Instead of trying to fit a monoid interface, all of the arguments are given up front in a single type.
Here's a version I've written up quickly but not tested at all (but the idea should work, though you don't get type inference of arguments from result or vice versa).
```Haskell
-- This represents an interpolation string, this example only includes the interpolated arguments
-- The literal is first translated into this (much like integer literals are first converted to Integer)
-- Could be opaque with a GADT view type to pattern match it like a list
data Interpolation (as :: [Type]) where
    InterpNull :: Interpolation '[] -- might not get used
    InterpCons :: a -> !(Interpolation as) -> Interpolation (a ': as)

-- This is the default, wired in method called on the Interpolation type (except maybe nested cases should assume id).
-- Qualified / rebindable syntax can replace interpolate with whatever they want.
-- (Qualified will probably replace it with a fixed r.)
class Interpolable as r where
    interpolate :: Interpolation as -> r

-- This is probably what the nested case would do (could the defaulting mechanism handle this? I don't know)
instance as ~ as' => Interpolable as (Interpolation as') where
    interpolate = id

-- Monoidal interfaces interpolate each argument and concatenate, thus they usually have a constraint per element type
-- (I might have messed this up, but this is a standard construction you will find elsewhere - apply the class to each type level list element)
type AllC :: forall k . (k -> Constraint) -> [k] -> Constraint
type AllC c as where
    AllC _ '[] = '()
    AllC c (a ': as) = (c a, AllC c as)

--                      {- class -} {- monoid -} {- every element is in class -}         {- interpolation string -}
--                            |           |            |   {- class -> monoid method -}      |               {- result -}
interpolate_monoidal :: forall c -> Monoid b => AllC c as => (forall a . c a => a -> b) -> Interpolation as -> b
-- just fold the GADT like a list
interpolate_monoidal _ _ InterpNull = mempty
interpolate_monoidal constraint c (InterpCons a as) = c a <> interpolate_monoidal constraint c as

instance AllC Show as => Interpolable as String where
    interpolate = interpolate_monoidal Show show -- simple/inefficient
    -- interpolate as = appEndo (interpolate_monoidal Show (\x -> Endo (shows x)) as) ""
    -- more efficient - interpolate_monoidal as a ShowS monoid then convert to string at the end

-- text (via builder), etc
```

This has several benefits:
A. Performance wise e.g. a text function could interpolate as Text but via Builder, or it could even see the space it needs up front and allocate once.
B. There is a simple data type representing an interpolation (that could be used for nested cases).
   E.g. if nesting was supported you might always take the nested type to be the interpolation type.
   Then your class simply has to allow a `Interpolation as` element to work with nested arguments (or the user can call `interpolate` on it themselves to get an interpolated result).
C. It enables interpolations that aren't monoidal. There's no requirement that the constraint on interpolable is of the form `AllC _ as`.
   I think an example of this is the SQL Query example - does it really make sense to concatenate SQL queries?
   It seems like more often what you have is basically a grammar with holes to fill in, and actually concatenating arbitrary SQL queries doesn't really make sense.
   (but then maybe that's more of an argument against using this for SQL queries)

### 2. Type-level uninterpolated strings
Instead of converting the uninterpolated parts to String, convert them to a singleton string type like SSymbol or a newly introduced type.
Since they are all literals, they should be available at compile time, thus you could either have a proxy type and rely on KnownSymbol (which should be available), or use something like SSymbol instead.
```Haskell
data Uninterpolated (a :: Symbol) = Uninterpolated -- option to rely on HasSymbol being available

newtype Uninterpolated (a :: Symbol) = Uninterpolated (SSymbol a) -- doesn't rely on it
```
This lets you constrain what you allow in the uninterpolated parts.
This works with all of the other ideas, it doesn't depend on the list being heterogeneous.

Arguably if you do go with a heterogeneous list, then you should probably just intersperse it in the list anyway.
I.e. every literal is of the form: `literal ::= <uninterpolated> [${<expression>} <literal>] `
The type level version would become complicated and I think it would be a lot easier to just stick with the bespoke data types and `[Type] -> Type` kind.
I know I've said I don't like format specifiers, but if you really wanted them you could do them this way in a backwards compatible manner in a similar way.
```Haskell
newtype Specified (spec :: Symbol {- or structured version -}) a = Specified a
```

(Aside I didn't think of when writing this - it's nicer to do this for nesting too because you can avoid e.g. `Show (Interpolation as)` having to be the same as interpolate)

### 3. Decorating the argument context

Basically instead of getting the interpolated expression (of type `a`) you get an `Arg a` which is just `a` + some context information e.g. the source expression (opaque with projections, so extensible in future). This might depend on a debug flag, or maybe an extension switch would control whether the strings in the module give the contextual type or not (the interpolation class just has to allow both `a` and `Arg a`).

Reviewer: Here's a relatively concrete suggestion combining all of the ideas from my previous post.
You can read this for an overview, but lots of the ideas here are orthogonal.
I have not type-checked this, but I think the idea holds up.

```Haskell
-- Heterogeneous list, i.e. a tuple that has a nice type level index and can be iterated as a GADT
type Interpolation :: [Type] -> Type
data Interpolation as -- opaque

-- This is just to keep interpolation opaque. Arguably this is overkill.
type ConsView :: [Type] -> Type
data ConsView as where
   Cons :: a -> !(Interpolation as) -> ConsView (a ': as)
   Null :: ConsView '[]
-- probably should be a bidirectional pattern
toConsView :: ConsView as -> Interpolation as
fromConsView :: Interpolation as -> ConsView as

-- These are the types of arguments you get given in the list.

-- Argument context wrapper
type Arg :: Type -> Type
data Arg a -- opaque
value :: Arg a -> a
expression :: Arg a -> String -- might give meaningless information without a debug compilation flag

-- Uninterpolated portions
type Uninterpolated :: Symbol -> Type
data Uninterpolated s = Uninterpolated

-- Nested interpolations if needed
-- This means you can have Show (Interpolation as) not interpolate (e.g. it might show the source interpolation expression).
type Nested :: [Type] -> Type
newtype Nested as = Nested (Interpolation as)

-- Not proposed, but backwards compatible: format specifiers
-- type Specified :: Spec -> Type -> Type
-- newtype Specified spec a = Specified a

-- End of arguments, start of uses of the type

-- new wired in default/not qualified/not rebound class and method
type Interpolable :: [Type] -> Type -> Constraint
class Interpolable as r where
    interpolate :: Interpolation as -> r

instance as ~ as' => Interpolable as (Interpolation as')

-- monoidal example for string

type Internal_AllC :: (c -> Constraint) -> ([c] -> Constraint)
-- applies Internal_AllC c as = constraint c holds for all as, decomposes nicely with cons view

instance Internal_AllC Show as => Interpolation as String
-- this can simply fold the GADT given, you can write a generic monoidal version (I did in the previous comment)
```

So your interpolate function just needs to handle heterogeneous lists whose elements are either
- A value to interpolate
- A value to interpolate in context (controlled by extension, debug flag, or prefix - something like that)
- A type indicating it is an uninterpolated section (text available in the type)
- A type indicating it is a nested interpolation string
- If someone really wants it - a type indicating an argument along with format specifiers (available in the type)

And you can constrain these however you want (aside from runtime only values, e.g. s"{1.0 :: Float}" vs s"{0.2 :: Float}").

Author: That's a lot more detail than I was hoping for 😛 

If I understand you correctly, it sounds like you want the desugaring to result in something like
```hs
interpolate (val1 `HCons` Proxy @" = " `HCons` val2 `HCons` HNil)
```
where `interpolate` is a multiparam type class that can decide, for a given interpolator, what to do with the hlist?

The complexity is the major concern here, with two things coming to mind:
1. It seems like the errors would be much more confusing. If I create an interpolator that only allows interpolating `Num` and someone tries interpolating a `String`, I would imagine the error would be absolutely terrible
2. A major increase in complexity requires a higher burden of usefulness - are we getting enough benefit to outweigh the complexity? What I like about the current proposal is we get a pretty lightweight basic string interpolation, with qualified string interpolations for really heavy uses. The major benefit of your proposal seems to be one general framework for both, but I don't see anything your framework can do that qualified string interpolations can't, and I'd prefer two fairly lightweight mechanisms than one unified complex mechanism

Reviewer: As for the benefits:
1. I'm not aware of any desired functionality anyone wants that is excluded by this (all of the other proposals could be done in terms of this using rebindable or qualified syntax as far as I'm aware)
2. The interpolation type gets all the arguments up front thus can be maximally efficient, allocate up front etc
3. It has a nice answer for nesting (at least the library/implementation side, not the parser side)
4. If you really want to validate beyond which elements are allowed, you can do any validation you want
   (rule out direct nesting, or any nesting if you can't interpolate the result, rule out certain strings, or any strings in uninterpolated parts, rules on the order of arguments, ...)

I think the instances are slightly convoluted, but to some degree I think that's just current type level Haskell code that is flexible and solves nicely.
If you specialised that monoidal function to just show specifically (thus no required type argument, rank 2 show argument, ...) it's a straightforward interpolation function defined the same way you fold normal lists (but each argument has a different type).
So I don't think it's that hard to understand that all the arguments get packaged up as a type (much like an integer literal is packaged up as an Integer) and then passed to interpolate, an idea a beginner could understand but probably not implement an `interpolate` themselves without a guide.

Author: Overall, I'm still unconvinced about this. It's much more complicated (conceptually + technically) and I'm not seeing any major wins.

Reviewer: If it can do that then the benefits are only down to
- type inference when nested (which really just amounts to picking a type for the nested interpolation)
- compile time checks on the string

Both of which you could do with the other approach the same way (but I imagine you would want an hlist for the nested case)

Author: @phadej Moving your comments into a thread

> Let's consider an example mentioned in comments [...]
> https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#issuecomment-3206935458

I'm not sure what your goal is in this comment. Yes, nested string interpolation with OverloadedStrings has issues with ambiguous types. That's also true with OverloadedStrings today.

> Using {-# OVERLAPPABLE #-} / {-# OVERLAPPING #-} would work, but so far base doesn't use any overlapping example, so the first use would need to be well motivated. For alternative see how Show and Read avoid the issue (for a little complexity cost).

So this is a bit gross, but it works:
```hs
{-# LANGUAGE GADTs #-}

import Data.Typeable

class Foo a where foo :: a -> String
-- instance Foo String where foo = id
instance Foo Char where foo = show
instance Foo Int where foo = show
instance (Typeable a, Foo a) => Foo [a] where
  {-# SPECIALIZE instance Foo String #-}
  foo =
    case eqT @a @Char of
      Just Refl -> id
      Nothing -> concatMap foo

main = do
  print $ foo "asdf"
  print $ foo [1, 2 :: Int]
```

It would be nice to avoid `showList`, it always felt like a wart in the design.

Reviewer 2: > I'm not sure what your goal is in this comment. Yes, nested string interpolation with OverloadedStrings has issues with ambiguous types. That's also true with OverloadedStrings today.

It's not a concern with `OverloadedStrings`, you can engineer APIs so types are propagating in one direction: concrete argument types, polymorphic result types, i.e.

```diff
+good :: Num res => Text -> res

-bad :: Num arg => arg -> String
```

`good` works well with `OverloadedStrings`, `bad` doesn't.,

Author: > The wart is type String = [Char], not the showList. showList is necessity to work around the wart.

Agreed, but it's still a visible API that would be nice to avoid

> good works well with OverloadedStrings, bad doesn't.,

Sure, but you're cherry picking examples. If you have a `bad` function, you can't turn it into a `good` function. This comes up often, e.g. if you want to use it on the RHS of `Data.Aeson.(.=) :: ToJSON a => Key -> a -> Pair` or on the RHS of `elem`.

Add native string interpolation syntax
======================================

.. author:: Brandon Chinn
.. date-accepted:: Leave blank. This will be filled in when the proposal is accepted.
.. ticket-url:: Leave blank. This will eventually be filled with the
                ticket URL which will track the progress of the
                implementation of the feature.
.. implemented:: Leave blank. This will be filled in with the first GHC version which
                 implements the described feature.
.. highlight:: haskell
.. header:: This proposal is `discussed at this pull request <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570>`_.
.. sectnum::
.. contents::

Most languages have support for interpolating variables and (usually) arbitrary expressions:

* Python

  .. code-block:: python

    f"Expected: {x + y}, got: {result}"

* Rust

  .. code-block:: rust

    format!("Expected: {sum}, got: {result}")

* Scala

  .. code-block:: scala

    s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

> * Javascript/Typescript

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* JavaScript/TypeScript
```

  .. code-block:: javascript

    `Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}`

> This proposal proposes adding S-strings (like Scala's syntax) to Haskell.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This proposal adds S-strings (like Scala's syntax) to Haskell.
```

Motivation
----------

Most non-trivial projects build strings at some point: printing out logs, rendering exceptions, generating code, pretty-printing. There are currently multiple ways to do this:
::

  -- concatenation + show
  error $ "Expected: " <> show (x + y) <> ", got: " <> show result

  -- printf
  error $ printf "Expected: %d, got: %d" (x + y) result

  -- safer printf, e.g. the `formatting` package
  error $ format ("Expected: " % int % ", got: " % int) (x + y) result

  -- quasiquoters, e.g. `string-interpolate` using `haskell-src-exts`
  error [i|Expected: #{x + y}, got: #{result}|]

  -- find-and-replace
  error $
    Text.replace "${x + y}" (Text.show $ x + y) $
    Text.replace "${result}" (Text.show result) $
    "Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

> But each of these options leave much to be desired:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
But each of these options leaves much to be desired:
```

* Manual interpolation (e.g. ``<>``, ``show``, ``unwords``, etc.) is annoying, especially for strings with a lot of interpolation. It's hard to see the overall structure of the string, especially when building up a ``Text``:
  ::

    let
      name1 = _ :: Text
      age1 = _ :: Int
      name2 = _ :: Text
      age2 = _ :: Int

      textExample1 = name1 <> " (age: " <> T.pack (show age1) <> ") encountered " <> name2 <> " (age: " <> T.pack (show age2) <> ")"

      textExample2 = T.pack $ T.unpack name1 <> " (age: " <> show age1 <> ") encountered " <> T.unpack name2 <> " (age: " <> show age2 <> ")"

      textExample3 = T.unwords
        [ name1
        , "(age: " <> T.pack (show age1) <> ")"
        , "encountered"
        , name2
        , "(age: " <> T.pack (show age2) <> ")"
        ]

> * ``printf`` is partial and unsafe, which especially safety-conscious people might always stay away from anyway. Using a safer ``printf`` like ``formatting`` induces a third-party dependency, which is admittedly lightweight, but isn't as seamless of an integration as native string interpolation would be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``printf`` is partial and unsafe, which especially safety-conscious people may prefer to avoid entirely. Using a safer ``printf`` like ``formatting`` induces a third-party dependency, which is admittedly lightweight, but isn't as seamless as native string interpolation would be
```

* Find-and-replace is much more verbose and a bit less performant. It can also replace too much (e.g. ``Text.replace "${a}" a . Text.replace "${b}" "${a}" $ "${a}${b}"``), and it's possible to get out of sync (e.g. ``Text.replace "${a}" a "${a}${b}"``)

If Haskell had native string interpolation, it would have the benefit and safety of the current third-party quasiquotes without the need for Template Haskell, and be able to take advantage of features like `multiline strings <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/569>`_.
::

  error s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

  let textExample = s"${name1} (age: ${age1}) encountered ${name2} (age: ${age2})"

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

This proposal introduces the ``-XStringInterpolation`` extension, which enables ``s"Name: ${name}"`` syntax. It synergizes well with ``-XOverloadedStrings``, ``-XMultilineStrings``, and ``-XQualifiedStrings``.

High-level Overview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> At its core, this proposal proposes the following functionality:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At this proposal's core, the following functionality is added:
```

> * ``s"..."`` is exactly equivalent to ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.s"..."``, where ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`` is a new module in ``base``.

Reviewer 4: I think something is wrong here. The `Experimental` suffix is reserved for modules in `ghc-experimental`. Also GHC should know nothing about `base`!

Author: EDIT: Apologies, I got confused. Yes, it's correct down in the Machinery section. I have to update this line

---

~hm okay so should it be something like this:~
* ~Add `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental` to `ghc-experimental`~
* ~When the compiler desugars `s"..."` to `D.S.I.E.interpolateString`, that would be a wired-in identifier, so the user wouldn't be adding `ghc-experimental` as a dependency~
* ~If a user wishes to refer to the built-in `interpolateString` function (e.g. `text` wishes to provide `Data.Text.Interpolate.s"..."`, which would define `interpolateString = D.S.I.E.interpolateString @Text`), they'd have to depend on `ghc-experimental`~
* ~In the future, we'd promote `ghc-experimental::Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental` to `base::Data.String.Interpolate`~

~?~

* The syntax ``s"age: ${age}"`` expands to a built-in implementation using a new ``Interpolate`` type class to interpolate values such as ``age``

* The syntax ``M.s"age: ${age}"`` expands to a user-defined implementation where the implementor of the module ``M`` has total control over the implementation

  * Same technique as ``-XQualifiedStrings``

> * ``s"..."`` is exactly equivalent to ``Data.String.Experimental.s"..."``, where ``Data.String.Experimental`` is a new module in ``ghc-experimental``.

Reviewer 3: I think we need to weaken a bit

```suggestion
* ``s"..."`` expands to ``Data.String.Experimental.s"..."``, where ``Data.String.Experimental`` is a new module in ``ghc-experimental``. (Modulo ``-XOverloadedStrings``; see `OverloadedStrings`_.)
```

and then when `-XOverloadedStrings` enters the picture, we need to adjust this expansion. The reason is that the qualified interpolation is unaffected by `-XOverloadedStrings` vs. `s"..."` is.

  istringMultilineEnd → '"""'

Also add ``$`` to ``charesc``:

.. code-block:: abnf

  charesc → a | b | f | n | r | t | v | \ | " | ' | & | $

With ``$`` added to ``charesc``, interpolation can be avoided by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``s"\${foo}" == "${foo}"``.

This grammar enables interpolating expressions with nested braces. Concretely, ``istringExprOpen`` and ``istringExprClose`` are only lexed within the ``istring`` and ``istringMultiline`` grammar productions, using Alex start codes. See `Section 3.1 Parsing <#31parsing>`_ for examples.

Context-Free Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.5 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-18000010.5>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

.. code-block:: abnf

  aexp → qvar
       | ...
       | istring
       | istringMultiline

  istring →
    istringBegin
      {istringRaw | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose}
      istringEnd

  istringMultiline →
    istringMultilineBegin
      {istringMultilineRawStartLine | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose istringMultilineRawMidLine}
      istringMultilineEnd

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

> The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Experimental``. After the API has stablized, these might eventually live in ``base`` under ``Data.String``, alongside ``IsString``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Experimental``. After the API has stabilized, these might eventually live in ``base`` under ``Data.String``, alongside ``IsString``.
```

* An ``istringRaw`` component expands to ``interpolateRaw "<istringRaw>"``

  * ``<istringRaw>`` refers to the string literal stored in the ``istringRaw`` token

  * The string literal passed to ``interpolateRaw`` is a strict ``String`` literal, unaffected by ``-XOverloadedStrings``

* An ``istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose`` component expands to ``interpolateValue (<exp>)``

* The list of ``istring`` components between ``istringBegin`` and ``istringEnd`` expands to the expansion of the components, with ``interpolateAppend`` as "list cons" and ``interpolateEmpty`` as "list nil".

  * The expansion is generated as right-associative; i.e. it will desugar to ``x `interpolateAppend` (y `interpolateAppend` (z `interpolateAppend` ...))`` (parentheses omitted in all the examples for clarity)

  * Related: `Section 2.5.1 OverloadedStrings <#251overloadedstrings>`_ and `Section 2.5.2 QualifiedStrings <#252qualifiedstrings>`_

The desugaring here respects ``RebindableSyntax``, so a project that wishes to use a different desugaring for the default ``s"..."`` syntax may rebind the interpolator bindings as desired.

> OverloadedStrings
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. _OverloadedStrings:

OverloadedStrings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Author: Thanks; I'll change all the references to this syntax, although Sphinx documents the use-sites as doing `` :ref:`foo` `` instead of just `` `foo`_ ``. I changed to `:ref:`, and it renders fine with Sphinx, but not GitHub.
https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/referencing.html#ref-role

> When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, a final ``fromString`` is added after the ``interpolateFinalize`` call. This still constructs the string with ``StringBuilder`` -> ``String``, so users might prefer using ``-XQualifiedStrings`` instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, ``s"..."`` expands to ``fromString (Data.String.Experimental.s"...")`` instead. Note this still constructs the string via ``StringBuilder`` -> ``String`` before converting, so users wanting to avoid the intermediate ``String`` should prefer using ``-XQualifiedStrings`` instead.
```

QualifiedStrings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When ``-XQualifiedStrings`` is enabled, you may qualify string interpolation, where ``[modid.]s"..."`` desugars to the same expressions, except resolving the ``interpolate*`` functions as ``[modid.]interpolate*``. If both ``-XOverloadedStrings`` and ``-XQualifiedStrings`` are enabled, ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is ignored for ``[modid.]s"..."`` constructs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When ``-XQualifiedStrings`` is enabled, you may qualify string interpolation, where ``[modid.]s"..."`` desugars to the same expressions, except resolving the ``interpolate*`` functions as ``[modid.]interpolate*``. ``[modid.]s"..."`` is unaffected by ``-XOverloadedStrings`` because the latter applies only to the non-qualified form ``s"..."``.
```

The following laws should hold, if the expression compiles:

* ``M."str" == M.s"str"``

    * That is, a ``-XQualifiedStrings`` string literal and a ``-XStringInterpolation`` string expression with no interpolated values should be equivalent

* ``Data.String.fromString "str" == M.s"str"``

MultilineStrings
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When ``-XMultilineStrings`` is enabled, string interpolation may be used with multiline strings. Multiline string interpolations resolve the multiline string first, then do the string interpolation. This means that qualified string interpolations work with multiline strings for free.

::

  let x = "hello"

  -- original string
  let str0 =
        s"""
        ${x} world
        world ${x}
        ${x} world
        """

  -- resolve multiline string
  let str1 = s"${x} world\nworld ${x}\n${x} world"

  -- resolve interpolation
  let str2 = "hello world\nworld hello\nhello world"

``ghc-experimental`` modules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> This proposal would be adding the following modules to ``ghc-experimental``, which would potentially be promoted to a proper library like ``base`` once the feature is stablized.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This proposal would be adding the following modules to ``ghc-experimental``, which would potentially be promoted to a proper library like ``base`` once the feature is stabilized.
```

.. list-table::
    :align: left

    * - **Module**
      - **Details**
    * - ``Data.String.Experimental``
      - Re-exports ``Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental`` and ``Data.String.Interpolate.Default.Experimental``
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental``
      - Defines the ``Interpolate`` class and instances as written in `Section 2.4 Machinery <#24machinery>`_
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Default.Experimental``
      - Defines the classes and functions for the default ``s"..."`` syntax, as written in `Section 2.4 Machinery <#24machinery>`_
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Basic.Experimental``
      - Defines an interpolator that's the same as the default except interpolates values directly without automatic conversion with ``Interpolate`` (See `Section 10.3 Provided interpolator: Basic <#103provided-interpolator-basic>`_)
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.ShowS.Experimental``
      - Defines an interpolator useful for implementing ``showsPrec`` (See `Section 10.4 Provided interpolator: ShowS <#104provided-interpolator-shows>`_)

Template Haskell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We are intentionally not adding anything to Template Haskell, as one could just build the expression themselves. String interpolation is still supported in quotes, which will be desugared when translating to TH.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We are intentionally not adding anything to Template Haskell, as one could just build the expansion directly. String interpolation is still supported in quotes, which will be desugared when translating to TH.
```

  * Eliminates the whole benefit of a rebindable ``interpolateString``; having a blessed ``Interpolate`` class with a ``convert :: something`` function means everyone has to use that ``something`` type. The whole benefit of a rebindable ``interpolateString`` is, just like ``QualifiedDo``, as long as it typechecks, you can make its type whatever you want.

* Replace the callback ``M.interpolateString $ \raw convert append empty -> raw "age: " `append` convert age `append` empty`` with the expression directly, e.g. ``M.fromString "age: " `M.mappend` M.convert age `M.mappend` M.mempty``.

  * This would remove the major benefit of having one function to link to when clicking into an interpolated string, in an IDE / using a language server
  * This would also remove the ability to add a "finalizer", where perhaps it's more efficient to append in one type, but the final type should be "compiled"/"built" in some fashion
    * You could add ``M.finalizeInterpolatedString`` at the end, but then that's becoming more complicated than the current approach
  * See also the other alternatives to hardcode the operations

> Delimiter-related Alternatives

Reviewer 5: At face value, the Rust/Python notation without `$` seems nicer, especially if we won't allow unbracketed `s"$foo"`. I guess the main argument against it is that brackets can be quite a common occurrence in the strings, has that been the experience of Python and Rust devs?

Author: I write a lot of Python, and it doesn't come up often, but when it does (e.g. bash scripts, json), it's really annoying to do `f'{{"foo": {foo}}}'`. Also, Haskell uses braces a lot more, so if you want to use string interpolation to implement Show, it could be more frequent: `s"""User\{name = "{name}"}"""`.

But I'd be open to dropping the dollar

Reviewer 5: Now that you mention `Show` instances, could these interpolated strings be used to implement them properly, like with the `ShowS` "difference lists" technique? That would be a nice example to include and to compare to the status quo..

Author: Good idea! Added: ae5632e8ccafb03a98df3eb602cf725f9641982b

If this instance did not take advantage of the polymorphism and was implemented as ``fromString s"${file}:${line}:${col}"``, it could have a performance impact on custom interpolators, such as ``text``:

::

    -- Original
    Text.s"Error at: ${loc}"

    -- Desugared, staying in polymorphic `s` with `interpolate file <> ...`
    interpolateRaw "Error at: " `interpolateAppend`
        (interpolate file <> fromString ":" <> interpolate line <> fromString ":" <> interpolate col) `interpolateAppend`
        interpolateEmpty
    Text.Builder.toText $
        fromString "Error at: " <>
        (fromString file <> fromString ":" <> fromString (show line) <> fromString ":" <> fromString (show col)) <>
        mempty

    -- Desugared, monomorphic implementation with `fromString s"..."`
    interpolateRaw "Error at: " `interpolateAppend`
        fromString (interpolate file <> fromString ":" <> interpolate line <> fromString ":" <> interpolate col) `interpolateAppend`
        interpolateEmpty
    Text.Builder.toText $
        fromString "Error at: " <>
        fromString (file <> ":" <> show line <> ":" <> show col) <>
        mempty

> Notice that the monomorphic implementation would concatenate the file/line/col as String and then lifting it up to TextBuilder, while the polymorphic implementation lifts file/line/col to TextBuilder immediately and concatenates as TextBuilder.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Notice that the monomorphic implementation would concatenate the file/line/col as String and then lift it up to Text.Builder, while the polymorphic implementation lifts file/line/col to Text.Builder immediately and concatenates as Text.Builder.
```

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

An existing program containing ``s"..."`` will break when ``-XStringInterpolation`` is enabled. While there's precedent for this (Template Haskell splices make ``$(...)`` different from ``$ (...)``), this is the first instance where whitespace matters for an alphanumeric identifier. But this is not a big deal:

#. It's unlikely for someone to be naming a function as ``s`` in the first place

> #. Easily mitigatable: just add a space, which improves readability anyway

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Easy to mitigate: just add a space, which improves readability anyway
```

#. Prefixing string literals like ``s"..."`` is common in other languages: Python, Scala, Javascript/Typescript, etc. so it shouldn't be a big hurdle for newcomers

Interacts nicely with ``-XOverloadedStrings``, ``-XQualifiedStrings``, and ``-XMultilineStrings``. See `Section 2 Proposed Change Specification <#2proposed-change-specification>`_ above.

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------

> Development and maintenance is of moderate effort. Learnability for novice users will go up, since novice users probably expect string interpolation to be available, and might be frustrated at the lack of support currently.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Development and maintenance are of moderate effort. Learnability for novice users will go up, since novice users probably expect string interpolation to be available, and might be frustrated at the lack of support currently.
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I sent out multiple community surveys, the last one being open 2025-04-21 to 2025-04-30. Raw data and analysis can be found here: https://github.com/brandonchinn178/ghc-string-interpolation-prototypes/tree/main/results

Performance consideration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Strings are notorious for O(n^2) concatenations, but this only happens if you left-associate the concatenations. The desugaring here is always right-associated, so it should remain linear. The only case where it might be O(n^2) is when nesting interpolated strings inside interpolated strings (although benchmarking still shows this to be linear in practice).

Benchmarks: https://github.com/brandonchinn178/ghc-string-interpolation-prototypes/tree/main/bench

Builder
~~~~~~~

> A performance-minded person might want to take advantage of ``interpolateS`` and defer realizing the string until the very end.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if I have pointed this out already, but this example is an anti-pattern. We should not be encouraging this style of code.

The fundamental thing about the `Builder` pattern is that it makes appending cheap. So, `String -> Builder` is cheap and `Builder -> Builder -> Builder` is cheap, but `Builder -> String` is (relatively) expensive.

This means you want to keep things in `Builder` as late as possible. 

The ideal pattern is that you just feed the `Builder` value into whatever IO function you end up outputing like `hPutBuilder` or just returning it from your HTTP endpoint. This ensures that no extra intermediate values are created.

It is reasonable to want to use this interpolation syntax for builder. But the output of that should be a `Builder`. If the output is `String` then it's extremely likely that you will want to compose that at a later point, and then you will want to convert to `Builder` anyway!

So the way I see it, either you do not care about performance/copying and you consistently write your code to use `String`/`Text`. Or you do care about performance and you consistently write your code to use `Builder` of some sort.

Mixing the two like this is only inviting confusion and bad performance.

Author: > This means you want to keep things in `Builder` as late as possible.
>
> [...]
>
> It is reasonable to want to use this interpolation syntax for builder. But the output of that should be a `Builder`. If the output is `String` then it's extremely likely that you will want to compose that at a later point, and then you will want to convert to `Builder` anyway!

I don't understand; if you look at the code snippet below, that's exactly what's happening. It's Builder the entire time until the very end, right before `print`. Sure, it would be nice to have an `hPutBuilder` to avoid finalizing at all, but that's not always possible, if you don't have control over the function you're passing the `String` into.

> So the way I see it, either you do not care about performance/copying and you consistently write your code to use String/Text. Or you do care about performance and you consistently write your code to use Builder of some sort.

This feels like a false dichotomy to me. You don't always have control over how your values get consumed. The options are:

1. Append with String/Text, use as String/Text
2. Append with Builder, finalize to String/Text
3. Append with Builder, use as Builder

3 is faster than 2 is faster than 1. But 3 requires every point along the API uses Builder. So if 3 is not an option, a performance-minded person would still prefer 2 over 1. I don't see why 2 would be an anti-pattern; that's like arguing `Data.Text.Lazy.Builder` shouldn't have a `toLazyText` function because "if you're using Builder in the first place, you ought to use Builder all the way through"

Reviewer 4: Ah yes! My bad!

  * Would be slightly slower for finally outputting ``String`` compared to ``ShowS``
  * Writing a byte array is pretty low-level, perhaps more low-level than we'd like here

* Instead of string-specific logic, allow a general syntax for variadic functions

  * String interpolation could then just be a variadic function that takes multiple arguments of type ``Interpolate a => a``
  * Would be a nice language construct on its own, but its unfamiliarity would be a major loss for this feature
  * Also doesn't compose well with other features e.g. with multiline strings

Expansion-related Alternatives
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Hardcode to Monoid's ``mappend`` and ``mempty``

  * Would remove potential use-cases needing type-changing ``append``, e.g. ``a -> [a] -> [a]`` or ``f a -> f as -> f (a ': as)``
  * It's likely that most custom interpolators will implement ``interpolateAppend``/``interpolateEmpty`` with ``Monoid``, but we should avoid restricting the interface here

* Use ``M.fromString`` instead of ``interpolateRaw``, to more tightly connect ``StringInterpolation`` with ``QualifiedStrings``

>   * While ``QualifiedStrings`` and ``StringInterpolation`` are closely related, and implementions *ought* to implement them consistently, the language feature should not enforce it, in the same way that typeclass laws are not enforced by the language

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * While ``QualifiedStrings`` and ``StringInterpolation`` are closely related, and implementations *ought* to implement them consistently, the language feature should not enforce it, in the same way that typeclass laws are not enforced by the language
```

  * Even if we hardcoded ``fromString``, one could still devise a custom string interpolator that's inconsistent with ``M.fromString``; e.g. ``interpolateFinalize _ = "bad"``

* Hardcode a wired-in ``Interpolate`` class with ``interpolateValue`` (and potentially ``interpolateRaw``)

  * Redundant with the rebindable functionality with ``-XQualifiedStrings``

* Add an ``InterpolateBuilder`` type family to specify a builder type for the interpolator ``s`` and define ``interpolateFinalize`` with that type family

  * Allows the default ``s"..."`` to build more performantly for non-``String``
  * Type inference should be unambiguous, since ``s`` should be known, and ``Builder s`` is unique for a given ``s``
  * Adds complexity; probably better to just use a qualified interpolator for this

Delimiter-related Alternatives
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Allow ``$foo`` in addition to ``${foo}``

>   * This would complicate the syntax, and would also require interpolated string to escape bare ``$``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * This would complicate the syntax, and would also require interpolated strings to escape bare ``$``.
```

* Different quote delimiter

  * ``s"..."`` was taken from Scala's interpolation syntax
  * Could use ``f"..."`` like Python, with ``f`` for format, but ``f`` is a common variable name for functions and if the user forgets to enable ``-XStringInterpolation``, ``f"..."`` would parse as ``f "..."`` which is likely to be valid.
  * Could use ``i"..."``, with ``i`` for interpolate.
  * Could reuse QuasiQuote syntax, e.g. ``[s|`` or ``[fmt|``, except it would be special and NOT use Template Haskell.
  * Could do ``''...''``, since ``''`` is invalid Haskell syntax today. However, code highlighters that aren't updated for ``-XStringInterpolation`` yet would not gracefully handle this.

* No quote delimiter, always interpolate

>   * e.g. if we switch the delimiter to `\{...}`, which is currently invalid in a string

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * e.g. if we switch the delimiter to ``\{...}``, which is currently invalid in a string
```

Context-Free Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.5 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-18000010.5>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

.. code-block:: abnf

  aexp → qvar
       | ...
       | istring
       | istringMultiline

  istring →
    istringBegin
      {istringRaw | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose}
      istringEnd

  istringMultiline →
    istringMultilineBegin
      {istringMultilineRawStartLine | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose istringMultilineRawMidLine}
      istringMultilineEnd

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``Data.String`` alongside ``IsString``.

::

  type SimpleStringInterpolator s =
    ( forall ss.
      (forall a. Interpolate a => a -> s)
      -> (s -> s)
      -> (s -> ss -> ss)
      -> ss
      -> ss
    )
    -> s

  interpolateString :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => SimpleStringInterpolator s

>   interpolateString f = mconcat $ f (fromString . interpolate) id (:) []

Reviewer 6: I'm generally attracted to the idea of the curried lambda encoding used in the proposal currently. In particular, I think it very plausible that a module such as `Data.Text` could be extended with an `interpolateString` export, so users who already `import Data.Text qualified as T` can then write `T.s"..."` with no further ceremony. I suspect extending `Data.Text` with 4-5 new exports, all of which belong together, is something of a more difficult sell. They could be shunted off to a new `Data.Text.Interpolate` module, but that will be less discoverable.

I wonder if some of the skepticism might be overcome with some judicious use of `newtype`s so that the implementation details are hidden behind an abstraction boundary. Concretely, what if we say `s"foo ${42 :: Int} baz"` expands to
```hs
interpolateString (coerce (\ interpolate raw cons nil finalise -> finalise $ raw "foo " `cons` (interpolate (42 :: Int) `cons` (raw " baz" `cons` nil))))
```
where the library provides (modulo bikeshedding)
```hs
-- | Represents a value of string type `s` built by interpolating values using
-- the 'Interpolate' class.
newtype Interpolated s =
    Interpolated
        { runInterpolated :: RunInterpolated s [s] }

-- | Internal implementation detail for 'Interpolated'
type RunInterpolated s ss =
               (forall a. Interpolate a => a -> s)  -- display an arbitrary value
            -> (String -> s)                        -- embed a raw String
            -> (s -> ss -> ss)                      -- cons
            -> ss                                   -- nil
            -> (ss -> s)                            -- finalise
            -> s

interpolateString :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => Interpolated s -> s
interpolateString f = runInterpolated f (fromString . interpolate) fromString (:) [] mconcat
```

What does this buy us?
 - The simplest case (unqualified literal, no `OverloadedStrings`) is that the interpolation literal expands to a call to `interpolateString` where GHC has constructed an argument of type `Interpolated String`. Most users don't need to understand the internals of the `Interpolated` newtype.
 - If `OverloadedStrings` is enabled, GHC constructs an argument of type `Interpolated s` and we get an `IsString s` constraint. Users of `OverloadedStrings` don't need to do anything more to use interpolation literals at type `Text` or whatever. (Hopefully the types are not ambiguous, and inlining/rules may be able to eliminate the intermediate `String`s, but that is hard to guarantee, which motivates using qualified literals.)
 - A library such as `text` can provide its own `InterpolatedText` newtype and expose its own `interpolateString :: InterpolatedText -> Text` function (from `Data.Text`) so that `T.s"..."` goes entirely through `Text`. Again, users don't need to care how it is implemented, though it could be something like:
   ```hs
   newtype InterpolatedText =
       InterpolatedText
           { runInterpolatedText :: RunInterpolated Text Text }

   interpolateString :: InterpolatedText -> Text
   interpolateString f = runInterpolatedText f interpolateText T.pack mappend T.empty id
     -- Library design questions for the text library:
     -- Does interpolateText use its own class or `T.pack . interpolate`?
     -- Do we use Text or [Text] for the intermediate type?
    ```

As the discussion above has shown, there are many trade-offs about possible class-based designs. I like the idea that the language feature defines the syntax as expanding to basic constructs (function call, lambda, application, coercion, string literals) and it is then a library design issue as to how `interpolateString` gives semantics to that syntax (whether via monomorphic `String`, monomorphic `Text`, or some class-based approach).

Side note: `coerce` typically has the property that the newtype constructor must be in scope in order to solve a `Coercible` constraint. We could say that the expansion is literally `coerce`, and libraries will need to export the newtype constructor in addition to `interpolateString`. But perhaps it makes sense to say that GHC inserts a cast directly (rather than a call to `coerce`) and looks through newtypes to construct the coercion?

Author: I updated the proposal so that it's no longer a lambda, but it's top-level functions like `interpolateRawString`, `interpolateConvertValue`, etc. The verbose naming means that `Data.Text` could easily export these are the bottom of the export list.

I'm not sure if there's anything else that could be salvaged from your comment after this change. Let me know if there's anything still relevant after the recent change

Reviewer 6: Fair enough. I weakly dislike the fact that we need lots of new exports and can't package up the implementation behind a single newtype, but given that the top-level approach is simple enough and there seems to be increasing consensus behind that direction, I'm happy to let this go.

BTW, many thanks for your continuing work on this proposal @brandonchinn178! It'll be great to see it in some form.

Author: I agree 🙃 but like you said, there's a lot of consensus growing behind it, and it seems to make people confused about the proposal, so in the effort of making the approval smoother, I decided to compromise on that.

You're very welcome, I'm also looking forward to getting (practically) any version of string interpolation in!

  {-# INLINE interpolateString #-}

  class Interpolate a where
    {-# MINIMAL interpolate | interpolateS #-}

    interpolate :: a -> String
    interpolate x = interpolateS x ""

    interpolateS :: a -> ShowS
    interpolateS x s = interpolate x <> s

``interpolateS`` is necessary in order to interpolate recursive data structures in linear time, but ``interpolate`` is more straightforward for simple data types.

> Instances will be provided as well, for example:

Reviewer 6: Apologies if this has come up before, but the `Interpolate` class feels like it is not particularly specific to string interpolation, instead it is more like a general `Display` class for human-readable display of values. Such a thing has occasionally been suggested in the past (e.g. https://hackage.haskell.org/package/display, and c.f. also `displayException`). Is it worth naming it `Display` and promoting it independently, e.g. with its own module?

In order to be useful, `Interpolate` will eventually need to have instances for many types (both in core libraries such as `base`/`text` but also in other libraries). Giving it a more general purpose (not just for adopters of the new string interpolation feature) might help with that. (We should eventually loop in the CLC as well about this, since these are library interfaces ultimately (hopefully) destined for `base`...)

Author: How should the CLC be looped into this? Open a CLC proposal after this is approved?

IMO we should have specific classes instead of a single Display class. How a thing should be rendered is heavily dependent on context; how a thing should be interpolated might be different from how it should be rendered in other contexts. Prime example is why we're not reusing Show; showing a value and interpolating a value have different semantics

Reviewer 6: > How should the CLC be looped into this? Open a CLC proposal after this is approved?

I think that's a good idea, yes. Technically the proposal can be implemented in `ghc-experimental` without touching the `base` API or requiring a CLC proposal, but given that `Interpolate` is intended to be a user-facing class given instances by lots of different packages, it makes sense to flag it up to the CLC early so the proposal/implementation can be amended if needed.

> IMO we should have specific classes instead of a single Display class. How a thing should be rendered is heavily dependent on context; how a thing should be interpolated might be different from how it should be rendered in other contexts. Prime example is why we're not reusing Show; showing a value and interpolating a value have different semantics

I definitely agree we should distinguish this from `Show`, because that's intended for producing Haskell terms, not human-readable versions (although some libraries have used `Show` for the latter already). But I don't think interpolation is a meaningfully more specific context than a generic human-readable rendering.

`Interpolate`/`Display` will be special by virtue of being the sole such class in `ghc-experimental`/`base`, and there will be pressure for lots of libraries to implement it (at least those libraries defining datatypes with sensible human-readable renderings). Under those conditions I think it will naturally be used as a way to get a general-purpose display operation. Of course if a type has multiple plausible renderings, it doesn't necessarily need to have an instance, and/or newtypes can be used (like e.g. `Any`/`All` for selecting a monoid on`Bool`).

Reviewer 7: > But I don't think interpolation is a meaningfully more specific context than a generic human-readable rendering.

It is, e.g. for SQL queries. There you do not actually want to interpolate a textual representation, but just convert to one of the native types of the database to create a prepared statement.

Reviewer 6: > It is, e.g. for SQL queries. There you do not actually want to interpolate a textual representation, but just convert to one of the native types of the database to create a prepared statement.

In that case you would necessarily use a qualified interpolation, not the `Interpolate`/`Display` class. (The proposal illustrates this very nicely, and safe SQL interpolation is a very nice feature! But it's orthogonal to the discussion here.)

::

  {----- Implementation of s"..." -----}

  interpolateRaw :: String -> StringBuilder
  interpolateRaw = fromString

  interpolateValue :: Interpolate a => a -> StringBuilder
  interpolateValue = interpolate

  interpolateAppend :: StringBuilder -> StringBuilder -> StringBuilder
  interpolateAppend = mappend

  interpolateEmpty :: StringBuilder
  interpolateEmpty = mempty

  interpolateFinalize :: StringBuilder -> String
  interpolateFinalize = buildString

  {----- StringBuilder -----}

  newtype StringBuilder = StringBuilder (Endo String)
    deriving newtype (Semigroup, Monoid)
  instance IsString StringBuilder where
    fromString s = StringBuilder (Endo (s <>))

  buildString :: StringBuilder -> String
  buildString (StringBuilder (Endo f)) = f ""

  {----- Interpolation of values -----}

  class Interpolate a where
    interpolate :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s

  instance Interpolate String where
    interpolate = fromString
  instance Interpolate Char where
    interpolate c = fromString [c]

  instance Interpolate Int where
    interpolate = fromString . show
  instance Interpolate Double where
    interpolate = fromString . show
  instance Interpolate Bool where

>     interpolate = fromString . show

Reviewer: I had some quick questions on `Interpolate` instances. Not sure if these need clarifying or if it would be better for the follow up I think you mentioned on the API, since it's still experimental. 

- Presumably this is abbreviated and it is desirable that instances exist for all basic `Integral` and `RealFloat` types, equivalent to their `Show` instances (decimal float/integer rendering), so `Float`, `Word`, `Integer`, `Word8`... etc. But presumably there won't initially be `Complex` or `Ratio` instances unless the conversion is decided (which might not match `Show`'s `3 :+ 4` and `3 % 4`).

- `Bool`: Is this implying typical instances for enums in general e.g. `Ordering`? If not is it really necessary to have `Bool` initially (it can always be added later, it just can't be removed once stable)? I think `True` and `False` are kind of `Show` specific, which I think people were against (against `Show`, I don't know if anyone had specific opinions on `Bool`). E.g. you might also want `true` and `false`, `yes` and `no` or `y/n`, `1/0`, check/cross, another language... etc situationally. Not sure if people are that often interpolating `Bool`s in a general, non-showy/non-debug context either.
 
  This might be a question for a subsequent proposal because I think the previous bullet point is implied by the proposal, unlike this one.

I was also wondering about `instance Interpolate StringBuilder` but I defer that to the API discussion as I had an idea about it that I think will end up with it not being needed. Basically if builders came back they could have a dedicated qualified interpolation module for which `interpolateValue = id`, thus not requiring builders to have to go into totally different `String` types (and possibly avoiding some superclass cycles?).

Author: 1. Correct, there will be instances for all primitive numeric types.
2. Complex/Ratio will probably not have instances yet, as it's easier to add instances later than change them.
3. Not necessarily generic for all enums. I probably won't add Interpolate for Ordering or other enums. I think Bool is uniquitous enough to provide, though.
4. I do think we should provide Bool instances to interpolate as True/False. If you need different instances like y/n, use a newtype. I think most other languages use their representation of Bool as the interpolation, and I think it's fine as a default.
5. The proposal already documents adding a Basic interpolator out-of-the-box that defines interpolateValue = interpolateFinalize = id

Reviewer: Thanks for the quick answers, I hadn't realised there was already such an interpolator. W.r.t `Bool` it's not that I think if it /had/ an instance it should do anything other than `True` and `False`, I just thought it introduced more questions than it solved problems, so not a big deal either way.

I would probably use a function rather than a newtype for this incidentally. This also gives you a convenient generic way of doing format specifiers, `s"True? ${my_bool&yn}"` where `yn :: Bool -> StringBuilder` and `&` is the typical `Data.Function` flipped apply operator, which is not very far off from `s"${my_bool:yn}"`. [Really only inconvenient if you want string format specifiers.]

::

  error s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

  let textExample = s"${name1} (age: ${age1}) encountered ${name2} (age: ${age2})"

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

When a new ``StringInterpolation`` extension is enabled, the following syntax:
::

  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

will be syntax sugar for:
::

  interpolateRaw "foo "#
  . doInterpolate (f a b)
  . interpolateRaw " bar "#
  . doInterpolate (g x)
  . interpolateRaw " baz "#
  . doInterpolate name
  $ interpolateEmpty

where:
::

  class Interpolate s where
    interpolateRaw :: Addr# -> s -> s
    default interpolateRaw :: (IsString s, Semigroup s) => Addr# -> s -> s
    interpolateRaw s = (fromString (unpackCString# s) <>)

    interpolateEmpty :: s
    default interpolateEmpty :: Monoid s => s
    interpolateEmpty = mempty

  class Interpolate s => InterpolateValueRunner s a where
    doInterpolate :: a -> s -> s

  class Interpolate s => InterpolateValue flag s a where
    {-# MINIMAL interpolate | interpolatePrec #-}

    interpolate :: Proxy flag -> a -> s
    interpolate proxy a = interpolatePrec proxy 0 a interpolateEmpty

>     interpolatePrec :: Proxy flag -> Int -> a -> s -> s

Reviewer 8: What is this for? Generally there isn't any explanation of the design of this series of typeclasses.

    default interpolatePrec :: Semigroup s => Proxy flag -> Int -> a -> s -> s
    interpolatePrec proxy _ a s = interpolate proxy a <> s

  data InterpolateDefault
  data InterpolateOverride

>   class InterpolateValueFlag s a flag | s a -> flag

Reviewer 8: I think what you're trying to do is to provide some customizable behavior for how values are interpolated in. I think we should at least discuss some simpler alternatives. The obvious ones to me are:
1. Values which are interpolated in must always be of the string type being interpolated. If you want to interpolate something else in you need to call `show` or whatever yourself. This is what Nix does, for example. This has the advantage of being very simple and giving the user full control just by calling functions. (This would be my preference)
2. Values which are interpolated in get `fromString . show` called on them. This is also very simple and relies on the language's default approach for displaying things, which is somewhat appropriate for a language feature.

It seems sad to add _another_ way of displaying strings that many users will need to implement. It's also unclear _who_ is going to end up writing these instances. Is it the author of the string type? Or is it the author of the type being interpolated? What if they disagree about how things should be put in?

Reviewer 8: I guess if we did my suggestion for having a separate accumulator type then with alternative 1 we would probably want to allow either a string (in which case you call `fromString`) or a value of the accumulator type. Perhaps that's a little tricky.

Author: @michaelpj Lots of questions here :) I apologize if the proposal isn't clear, I can improve it more when I get a chance. Let me try to explain it from first principles.

I tried to imitate what Show does with showsPrec here for performance reasons, but let's ignore all of that. Fundamentally, I want interpolation to be variable in two ways:

1. The type of the final expression (analogous to IsString)
2. How a value should be converted into that type to be joined in (analogous to Show)

I want (1) to be different than just reusing IsString for things like an injection-safe SqlQuery type.

```hs
let val = "true; drop table tab;"
s"SELECT * FROM tab WHERE col = ${val}"

-- should result in:
SqlQuery
    "SELECT * FROM tab WHERE col = ?"
    [SqlString "true; drop table tab;"]
```

Ignoring performance, I want the following semantics:
```hs
s"a ${b} c"

-- assuming r is a Monoid
-- interpolateRaw :: String -> r
-- interpolateVal :: a -> r
interpolateRaw "a " <> interpolateVal b <> interpolateRaw " c"
```

I think you're suggesting Text.Builder as a way to solve the performance issue of the <>, but that's not the performance issue the Addr# was solving; the purpose of the Addr# is so interpolateRaw could go directly from `Addr# -> r`, for cases where that's a more optimal path than going `Addr# -> String -> r`.

I'm not sure how to respond to the rest of your comments. Does this explanation make sense? Do you mind rephrasing your comments in the context of this explanation?

Author: Oh and also: "Values get interpolated as `fromString . show`" won't work as-is, because you probably don't want strings to be quoted:

```hs
let foo = "abc"
putStrLn s"example: ${foo}"

-- example: "abc"
```

So you'd need at least a special case for String/Text to be `id`/`pack`/`unpack` instead of `show`

Reviewer 8: > I want (1) to be different than just reusing IsString for things like an injection-safe SqlQuery type.

It would be helpful to explain all this in the motivation since it seems like a major design constraint! 

> the purpose of the Addr# is so interpolateRaw could go directly from Addr# -> r, for cases where that's a more optimal path than going Addr# -> String -> r

This seems unconvincing to me. Is the cost of processing the single string literals so big? I can see the case for worrying about repeated concatenation while building the interpolated string (since that can be accidentally quadratic), but processing the individual literal pieces doesn't seem like it should be any worse than processing string literals today, which I don't recall seeing performance complaints about?

Again, I think writing down the reasoning would help a lot!

> How a value should be converted into that type to be joined in (analogous to Show)

Okay, but you're baking in a whole new how-like mechanism to do that. If that's what you want, how about this?

```haskell
class (Semigroup (Accumulator s)) => Interpolate s where
   type Accumulator s :: Type
   type Hole s :: Type

   interpolateHole :: Hole s -> Accumulator s
   
   interpolateFinish :: Accumulator s -> s

instance Interpolate SqlQuery where
   type Accumulator SqlQuery = SqlQuery
   type Hole SqlQuery = SqlString
   
   interpolateHole = -- however you turn SqlStrings into queries
   interpolateFinish = id
```

The details are mostly just to be explicit, quite probably this doesn't quite work, but the idea is that we could also have a "hole" type, and then we can control how things get turned into holes (the user has to produce a value of the hole type), and also how the holes get folded into the accumulator.

  instance {-# OVERLAPPABLE #-} (flag ~ InterpolateDefault) => InterpolateValueFlag s a flag

  instance
    ( Interpolate s
    , InterpolateValueFlag s a flag
    , InterpolateValue flag s a
    ) => InterpolateValueRunner s a where
    doInterpolate = interpolatePrec (Proxy :: Proxy flag) 0

> We will always require interpolation to be of the form ``${foo}``, unlike other languages where ``$foo`` is allowed for single-variable interpolation. This simplifies the syntax and avoids the need for escaping bare ``$``. Interpolation may be escaped by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``"\${foo}"`` is equivalent to ``['$', '{', 'f', 'o', 'o', '}']``.

Reviewer 9: Could you share the design decision behind using explicit interpolation delimiter `$`?  As aforementioned, python, rust and [PyF](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/PyF) only uses `{}` to mark a placeholder, and (albeit subjective) looks cleaner to me. Did adding explicit delimiter make implementation easier?

Author: It shouldnt have any effect on implementation. Personally I like it, as curly braces are fairly common, while the `${` string is much less likely to come up.

e.g. if you want to interpolate into a JSON string:

```
s"{ "name": ${name} }"
```
vs
```
s"\{ "name": {name} \}"
```

Reviewer 9: Thanks for the quick answer. Indeed the benefits of not having to escape brackets would outweigh the inconveniences of having to type an extra `$`.

Reviewer 8: Might also be worth noting that it looks syntactically similar to the way we splice in Template Haskell quotes. I think this is nice, in that both of them have the quality of "insert this computed Haskell value into the surrounding context".

Indeed, I wonder if we could make the syntax even closer and use `$()` instead of `${}`?

Reviewer 7: I'd rather take the precendent of basically every other language, including e.g. bash and stay with curly braces

Reviewer: FWIW you could generalise $() even further to $aexp e.g. $name, with $(exp) being an instance of the rule, then $ would just be escaped as \$.

Reviewer 8: > I'd rather take the precendent of basically every other language, including e.g. bash and stay with curly braces

Sure, but the _closest_ precedent is the precedent of the language we are already in, i.e. Haskell :shrug:

  -- printf
  error $ printf "Expected: %d, got: %d" (x + y) result

  -- safer printf, e.g. the `formatting` package
  error $ format ("Expected: " % int % ", got: " % int) (x + y) result

  -- quasiquoters, e.g. `string-interpolate` using `haskell-src-exts`
  error [i|Expected: #{x + y}, got: #{result}|]

But each of these leave things to be desired:

* Manual interpolation (e.g. ``<>``, ``show``, ``unwords``, etc.) is annoying, especially for strings with a lot of interpolation. It's hard to see the overall structure of the string, especially when building up a ``Text``:
  ::

    let
      name1 = _ :: Text
      age1 = _ :: Int
      name2 = _ :: Text
      age2 = _ :: Int

      textExample1 = name1 <> " (age: " <> T.pack (show age1) <> ") encountered " <> name2 <> " (age: " <> T.pack (show age2) <> ")"

      textExample2 = T.pack $ T.unpack name1 <> " (age: " <> show age1 <> ") encountered " <> T.unpack name2 <> " (age: " <> show age2 <> ")"

      textExample3 = T.unwords
        [ name1
        , "(age: " <> T.pack (show age1) <> ")"
        , "encountered"
        , name2
        , "(age: " <> T.pack (show age2) <> ")"
        ]

> * ``printf`` is partial and unsafe, which especially safety-conscious people might always stay away from anyway. Using a safer ``printf`` like ``formatting`` induces a third-party dependency, which is admittedly lightweight, but isn't as seamless of an integration as native string interpolation would be

Reviewer 10: This argument generalises to building everything into GHC and moving every useful library into `base`. People liked Python's included batteries until they proved hard to changes, and now say things like "the standard library is where packages go to die". I'd like to know what the limiting principle is, because we could bundle everything with GHC in the name of convenience.

Perversely, I actually think that the fact that GHC Haskell is weird and limited has paid off with libraries that do so much better than the obvious fix: lenses are better than a naive record dot proposal, `formatting` is a lot better than interpolation, and we should not copy things from other languages just because they are there.

Author: > I'd like to know what the limiting principle is, because we could bundle everything with GHC in the name of convenience.

Well in this specific instance, we wouldn't "just" be bundling `formatting` into GHC. The benefit of adding this over just recommending `formatting` is because `formatting` wouldn't be able to take advantage of multiline strings (if that proposal is accepted). Compare:

```hs
let s =
      format
      ("""
      This is an example.
      Here is a list of people and their ages:
      Person named """ % text % " has age " % int % """.
      Another person named """ % text % " has age " % int % """.
      The end.
      """)
      name1 age1 name2 age2
```
vs
```hs
let s =
      s"""
      This is an example.
      Here is a list of people and their ages:
      Person named ${name1} has age ${age1}.
      Another person named ${name2} has age ${age2}.
      The end.
      """
```
Excusing the contrived example for a second, the second has much less glue getting in the way. If this isn't compelling to you, maybe we can just agree to disagree 🤷 

> `formatting` is a lot better than interpolation

I guess I just personally disagree

Reviewer 10: The thing I find compelling about `formatting` is that it looks more scalable to me than interpolation - it is easy to specify additional tweaks to each placeholder, use different functions to interpret the interpolation in different ways, etc. (Similarly, I use lenses over record sugar because it is more scalable).

I am lukewarm on multiline strings, mostly because I don't mind TH as much as some, but I think a straightfoward take on interpolation has the potential to be comfortably limiting.

Have you considered a `formatting`-style interpolation syntax, where `format f"Splice #{text} and #{int}` someText aNumber` -> `format ("Splice " % text % " and " % int) someText aNumber`? I don't know if it would be too magical to be easily understood.

But even if you think that is too magical, I'd prefer a simple and general mechanism for processing strings for different use-cases, that is usable by different libraries (cf. `-XOverloadedLabels`). But then you're back to running code at compile time, and basically back to TH. Hm...

Reviewer 11: If we have built-in interpolation, it doesn't have to preclude the use of any other string-manipulation (formatting and interpolation) library. Satisfying the long tail of use cases is a great use of independent libraries, since there are so many mutually exclusive solutions to various cases. Maybe I'm just not smart enough to think of the most general solution that is still ergonomic and uncontroversial, but there's no reason to think it exists, and plenty to think it doesn't.

I think it would be fine to explicitly say that the goal for built-in interpolation is to be the best way to handle a useful and abundant subset of use cases. If it can be shown to be compatible with select other techniques used in the same module (which is intentionally a strong definition of "compatible"), perhaps that would be an even stronger and less controversial position.

Reviewer: > > I'd like to know what the limiting principle is, because we could bundle everything with GHC in the name of convenience.
> 
> Well in this specific instance, we wouldn't "just" be bundling `formatting` into GHC. The benefit of adding this over just recommending `formatting` is because `formatting` wouldn't be able to take advantage of multiline strings (if that proposal is accepted). Compare:
> 
> ```haskell
> let s =
>       format
>       ("""
>       This is an example.
>       Here is a list of people and their ages:
>       Person named """ % text % " has age " % int % """.
>       Another person named """ % text % " has age " % int % """.
>       The end.
>       """)
>       name1 age1 name2 age2
> ```
> 
> vs
> 
> ```haskell
> let s =
>       s"""
>       This is an example.
>       Here is a list of people and their ages:
>       Person named ${name1} has age ${age1}.
>       Another person named ${name2} has age ${age2}.
>       The end.
>       """
> ```
> 
> Excusing the contrived example for a second, the second has much less glue getting in the way. If this isn't compelling to you, maybe we can just agree to disagree 🤷
> 
> > `formatting` is a lot better than interpolation
> 
> I guess I just personally disagree

These examples aren't equivalent, the former builds up a format and then applies it while the latter builds up a formatted string. The equivalent version of the latter would be ...named """ % name1 % """ has age.... Similarly I suppose you could have something like ${text} in your interpolated string that doesn't actually get treated as a fixed string, or have the overall result by polymorphic. 

For existing Haskell, suppose you instead used QualifiedDo and OverloadedStrings you could get this down to
```Haskell
F.do "This is an example."
     "Here is a list of people and their ages: "
     "Person named "%name1%" has age "%age1%"."
```
The cost becomes "% %" in place of ${ }. Conceivably you might even still have %text% for a delayed argument.
(You could use two different qualified do modules for auto ending and non auto ending lines.)

Could optionally provide a newtype for easy derivation with ``DerivingVia``, or even make ``Interpolate`` one of the built-in class that can be derived (like ``Show``):
::

  newtype InterpolateFromShow a = InterpolateFromShow a

  instance Interpolate (InterpolateFromShow a) where
    interpolatePrec = showsPrec

  data Foo = Foo Int Bool
    deriving (Show)
    deriving (Interpolate) via InterpolateFromShow Foo

We will always require interpolation to be of the form ``${foo}``, unlike other languages where ``$foo`` is allowed for single-variable interpolation. This simplifies the syntax and avoids the need for escaping bare ``$``. Interpolation may be escaped by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``"\${foo}"`` is equivalent to ``['$', '{', 'f', 'o', 'o', '}']``.

Any Haskell expression may go inside the braces, but an unmatched ``}`` will immediately end processing. This restriction simplifies the implementation and isn't a big deal in practice, since one could always break it out into a helper variable.

> When ``OverloadedStrings`` is enabled, calls ``fromString`` with the result.

Reviewer 10: This means that SQL libraries which currently provide safe `IsString` instances retroactively become vulnerable to injection, if someone tries to interpolate a query string.

Author: Yeah, that's fair. I added a note to that

::

  -- "Line 1: 100\nLine 2: 200\n"
  let s =
        s"""
        Line 1: ${x}
        Line 2: ${y}
        """
      x = 100
      y = 200

Examples
--------

An ``Interpolate`` instance different from ``Show``:
::

  data TestFailure = TestFailure { message :: String, file :: FilePath, lineNumber :: Int }
    deriving (Show)

  instance Interpolate TestFailure where
    interpolate TestFailure{..} = s"${message} (at ${file}:${lineNumber})"

  let failure = TestFailure "Bad value" "test.hs" 10

  -- "TestFailure { message = \\\"Bad value\\\" file = \\\"test.hs\\\", lineNumber = 10 }"
  let s1 = show failure

  -- "Bad value (at test.hs:10)"
  let s2 = interpolate failure

  -- "Got a failure: Bad value (at test.hs:10)"
  let s3 = s"Got a failure: ${failure}"

Interpolating expressions including braces:
::

  -- "A record: <Person Bob>"
  let s = s"A record: ${Person{name = "Bob"}}"

  -- parse error: `['` isn't a valid Haskell expression
  let s2 = s"A brace: ${['}']}"

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

> No interactions with existing language features.

Reviewer 10: You have documented an interaction with `-XOverloadedStrings` in a previous section?

Author: Yes, sorry. Updated

      class Interpolate s => InterpolateValue s a where
        interpolatePrec :: Int -> a -> s -> s

      instance Interpolate String where
        interpolateRaw = (++)

      -- the usual instances
      instance InterpolateValue String String
      instance InterpolateValue String Int

      {----- user-defined -----}

      module MySqlQuery where

      data SqlQuery = SqlQuery { queryText :: String, queryVals :: [SqlVal] }
      instance Interpolate SqlQuery where
        interpolateRaw q1 (SqlQuery q2 vs) = SqlQuery (q1 <> q2) vs
      instance InterpolateValue SqlQuery String where
        interpolatePrec _ s (SqlQuery text vs) = SqlQuery text (SqlString s : vs)
      instance InterpolateValue SqlQuery Int where
        interpolatePrec _ x (SqlQuery text vs) = SqlQuery text (SqlInt x : vs)

      module Main where

      -- desugars to `interpolateRaw "SELECT * FROM foo WHERE id = " . interpolatePrec 0 id $ ""`
      pwnable :: Int -> String
      pwnable id = [s|SELECT * FROM foo WHERE id = ${id}|]

      -- desugars to `MySqlQuery.interpolateRaw "SELECT * FROM foo WHERE id = " . MySqlQuery.interpolatePrec 0 id $ ""`
      safe :: Int -> SqlQuery

>       safe id = [s.MySqlQuery|SELECT * FROM foo WHERE id = ${id}|]

Reviewer 10: It seems dangerous to ask the programmer to remember to look for and add an additional qualifier to get safe SQL query building. Note that the proposed interaction with `-XOverloadedStrings` would call `fromString` on an interpolation result, and the reason it's safe to give SQL Query types an `IsString` instance is that people generally only use them on literals or things that look like literals.

But if we had interpolations and someone went off to try and do query building via interpolation, GHC would silently let them. This seems like a bad outcome.

Author: This is in the Alternatives section, so not part of the main proposal. And this syntax isn't meant to interact with `OverloadedStrings`; I mention this in a sub-bulletpoint.

> the reason it's safe to give SQL Query types an IsString instance is that people generally only use them on literals or things that look like literals

Sure, this is a general remark on string interpolation, not this specific code snippet. You're right, assuming people aren't just using `fromString` around their codebase, `IsString` is currently safe from unsafe building in a way that wouldn't be true with string interpolation.

This specific code snippet actually protects against that, then, by defining a new `Interpolate` class instead of reusing `OverloadedStrings` (again, this `[s.MySqlQuery|` example does _not_ use `OverloadedStrings`).

Reviewer 10: So in this alternative, if a custom interpolator is used and `-XOverloadedStrings` are enabled, `fromString` is _not_ called on the result? That's one thing, but you still have the problem where if the programmer forgets to use the custom interpolator and `-XOverloadedStrings` is on, you will get interpolation into an SQL string.

Author: This whole example is incompatible with OverloadedStrings. So if we implemented this alternative ("generalizing the output type"), string interpolation would not use IsString at all

Reviewer 10: Does that then mean you have to select the correct custom interpolator when you switch between `String`, strict `Text`, and lazy `Text`?

Author: Again, this is all an Alternative proposal, so I haven't thought in depth about this. But it could select whatever `Interpolate` instance is in scope, with `[s.MySqlQuery|` being analogous to a qualified import

  * Benefit: one more metaprogramming technique, except this wouldn't require Template Haskell
  * Drawback: requires ``MultiParamTypeClasses``, probably has worse type inference, not sure how to integrate ``OverloadedStrings``
  * Perhaps this should just be left to third-party QuasiQuoters using something like ``ghc-meta``?

* Different delimiter

  * Could use ``f"`` like Python, with ``f`` for format. ``s`` for "String" seems a bit ad-hoc, but it does "look better" for some reason. ``s`` is also a bit better if the user forgets to enable ``-XStringInterpolation`` because ``f`` is a not-uncommon name for functions and ``f"asdf"``, being parsed as ``f "asdf"``, would work more often than ``s"asdf"`` would.
  * Could reuse QuasiQuote syntax, e.g. ``[s|`` or ``[fmt|``, except it would be special and NOT use Template Haskell.

* Different interpolation delimiter, e.g. ``#{foo}``

>   * Most languages use ``$``, and I see no reason to deviate

Reviewer 10: Ruby uses `#{..}`, as do packages `interpolate` and `string-interpolate`. `neat-interpolation` uses `$`, and I think either alternative would be recognisable as interpolation.

Author: I did say "most" 😉. I agree, either would be recognizable. But `$` _is_ more common, no?

Reviewer 10: I haven't sat down and counted, and I'm not certain what the correct class of things to count would be: common programming languages? Interpolation libraries on Hackage? Interpolation libraries on Hackage, weighted by revdeps in some way? I don't think it matters a whole lot.

Reviewer 12: We used `#{..}` instead of `${..}` in the `str` quasiquoter in streamly (https://streamly.composewell.com/haddocks/streamly-core-0.1.0/Streamly-Unicode-String.html). The reason was that we were writing shell script snippets using this and `${..}` conflicted with shell's syntax. If we ignore that, the `$` syntax is perhaps more intuitive.

Author: Specifically for interpolating in shell contexts, sure. But I don't think `\${x}` is that terrible for this fraction of use cases. You already have to do similar in shell, e.g.

```bash
bash -c "PATH=/foo/bin:\${PATH} ${cmd}"
```

Reviewer 9: maybe `\{..}` could also work? [idris2 uses this syntax](https://idris2.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/strings.html#interpolated-strings) and i think this is quite nice as it looks similar to lambda syntax `\x -> y`

Author: I'm not sure how "looking like a lambda" is relevant here. `s"User is \{name}"` isn't binding `name` like a lambda argument. Also, IMO it would be confusing for `\` to both denote/escape special characters and interpolate variables. I would also imagine this would be harder to implement in the parser.

I'd really like to limit bikeshedding this any further. Every suggestion is going to have tradeoffs. IMO the intuition/popularity of `${...}` greatly exceeds the cost of escaping it in specific scenarios[^1]. This assumption should be challenged first before we can discuss alternatives.

[^1]: In a sense, the two are correlated. The more popular a delimiter is, the more likely you'd need to escape it. So aiming to find a delimiter that's less likely to need escaping will necessarily be some bespoke delimiter no one else is using (yet).

Reviewer 9: you're right. I'll be happy to (finally) have a string interpolation syntax regardless how does it look like.

Any Haskell expression may go inside the braces, but an unmatched ``}`` will immediately end processing. This restriction simplifies the implementation and isn't a big deal in practice, since one could always break it out into a helper variable. This implies that nested string interpolation is not allowed.

Renamer implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After parsing, ``rnExpr`` gets something like:

::
  HsInterpolatedString
    (<SourceText>, False)
    "foo "
    [ (<f a b>, " bar ")
    , (<g x>  , " baz ")
    , (<name> , "")
    ]

``rnExpr`` will transform this into the equivalent ``HsExpr`` for the following code:

::
  fromBuilder $
    fromString "foo "
    <> interpolate (f a b) <> fromString " bar "
    <> interpolate (g x)   <> fromString " baz "
    <> interpolate name    <> fromString ""

Interpolation design
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following type classes would be implemented in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``GHC.Exts`` alongside ``IsString``.

::

  class (IsString (Builder s), Monoid (Builder s)) => Buildable s where
    type Builder s :: Type

>     fromBuilder :: Builder s -> s

Reviewer 13: A thing I don't think has been mentioned yet, and that seems worth mentioning:

This means that `s"foo" :: SomeType` can be very different than `"foo" :: SomeType`, despite not doing any interpolation. One or the other might fail to compile, and if they both compile then they might do different things.

If we don't want that we could suggest a law (given `IsString s`, `fromBuilder . fromString === fromString`).

Reviewer 13: I'm imagining using this to make data structure construction prettier. E.g. if you have

```haskell
data Rose a = Node a [Rose a]
myRose =
  Node 1
    [ Node 11 []
    , Node 12
        [ Node 121 [] ]
    , Node 13 []
    ]
```

Maybe there's some builder type that lets you write it as

```haskell
myRose = s"""
    ${1}
    - ${11}
    - ${12}
      - ${121}
    - ${13}
"""

Is it good that you can do that kind of thing? Not sure. I don't think this specific example is very helpful (if you want this you can probably also implement some monad that lets you use do notation), but maybe there's something it would be good for.

Reviewer 3: > This means that s"foo" :: SomeType can be very different than "foo" :: SomeType

I don't really think so. Note that there is no `IsString (Builder s)` instance involved here. We get
```
s"foo" 
=== {- desugar -}
fromBuilder (toBuilder (fromString "foo"))
=== {- builder iso -}
fromString "foo"
=== {- OverloadedStrings -}
"foo"
```

In https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#issuecomment-2268795638 I proposed to require `fromString @(Builder s) === toBuilder . fromString @s` which is equivalent to your requirement, but we do not really need that because we do not require the `IsString (Builder s)` instance.

> I'm imagining using this to make data structure construction prettier. 

Indeed we could think about nice syntax for `Buildable`. IMO we should not necessarily abuse string interpolation for that, though, so this is entirely separate from this proposal.

You could take inspiration in `blaze-html` and others and define a indentation-sensitive DSL based on do-notation:

```hs
myRose = do
  n 1 do
    n 11 []
    n 12 do
       n 121 []
    n 13 []
```

Author: I'm not sure how the tree structure arises. Can someone explain?

To take your example:

```haskell
myRose = s"""
    ${1}
    - ${11}
    - ${12}
      - ${121}
    - ${13}
"""
```

This would currently translate into

```hs
fromBuilder $
  toBuilder (fromString "")
  <> interpolate 1 <> toBuilder (fromString "\n- ")
  <> interpolate 11 <> toBuilder (fromString "\n- ")
  <> interpolate 12 <> toBuilder (fromString "\n  - ")
  <> interpolate 121 <> toBuilder (fromString "\n- ")
  <> interpolate 13 <> toBuilder (fromString "")
```
To get a tree structure, the interpolation would have to parse the indentation and recognize that deeper indentation is on a deeper level of the tree. I don't think this should be within the scope of string interpolation

Reviewer 13: Ah, maybe the proposal just hasn't been updated for some of the discussion that's happened? (It can be hard to keep track.)

To be clear, [currently](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/46f44928cedc93ed0f44cf92c8044f633b15ff3f/proposals/0570-string-interpolation.rst#22renamer-implementation) (as of 46f44928) the proposal would desugar `s"foo"` as `fromBuilder $ fromString "foo"`, not as `fromBuilder $ toBuilder $ fromString "foo"`.

If that's on the todo list to change, then fair enough. If we add `toBuilder`, then as long as `fromBuilder . toBuilder === id`, we'll have `s"foo" === "foo"`.

Author: Yes, I just woke up 🙂 So I haven't made that change yet. But yes, that is the expected behavior

If Haskell had native string interpolation, it would have the benefit and safety of the current third-party quasiquotes without the need for Template Haskell, and be able to take advantage of features like `multiline strings <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/569>`_.
::

  error s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

  let textExample = s"${name1} (age: ${age1}) encountered ${name2} (age: ${age2})"

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

Grammar
~~~~~~~

Add a new ``-XStringInterpolation`` extension, which, when enabled, adds a new expression to `Chapter 3 of the Haskell 2010 Report <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch3.html#x8-220003>`_ after do-expressions in the ``exp`` rule:

.. code-block:: abnf

  exp → ...
      | case exp of { alts }                    (case expression)
      | do { stmts }                            (do expression)
      | s"   interpolatedString "               (interpolated strings)

>       | s""" interpolatedStringMultiline """    (interpolated multiline strings)

Author: I intended `s"` to be shorthand for what you have below
```
interpolatedString → 's' " ...
```
Given that the case branch isn't spelled out as `'c' 'a' 's' 'e'`, I'm not sure why `s"` can't also be valid

      | fexp

Note that no space is allowed between the ``s`` and ``"``.

The ``interpolatedString`` and ``interpolatedMultilineString`` rules are new rules defined as follows:

.. code-block:: abnf

  interpolatedString               → {graphic⟨\ | "   | ${⟩ | space | escape | gap} [ ${ exp } interpolatedString ]
  interpolatedStringMultiline      → {{whitechar} interpolatedStringMultilineLine}

>   interpolatedStringMultilineLine  → {graphic⟨\ | """ | ${⟩ | space | escape | gap} [ ${ exp } interpolatedStringMultilineLine ]

Reviewer 3: Here it looks like you want to specify the lexical structure. This should come before the syntactic specification for `exp`!
Furthermore, you cannot mention the syntactic non-terminal `exp` while specifying lexical structure.

Also you do not extend `charesc` with `$` as I recommended in https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#issuecomment-2270722558. Otherwise, how would escape `$`?

---

Here is one idea for a specification. First, lexical structure:

```
interpolatedString → 's' " {graphic⟨'\' | '"'   | '$' '{'⟩ | space | escape | gap} [ '$' '{' { any⟨'}' | '"'⟩ } '}' ] } '"'
```

a post-processing step between lexer and parser must then split the single `interpolatedString` token along the the `{ any⟨'}' | '"'⟩ }` parts, which correspond to where the parser needs to recognise `exp`.

We will have 3 kinds of new tokens:

1. Every interpolated string gets born by the lexer as an `InterpolatedStringBalanced`. If there are no `${ ... }` in the string, it stays that way.
2. After lexing, the `InterpolatedStringBalanced` gets *segmented*: i.e. broken apart after each `${` and before each `}`. We get one token kind `InterpolatedStringBegin` that includes `${`, and another kind of token `InterpolatedStringEnd` which includes `}`.
3. Finally, we *re-lex* the `any` part that will constitute the expression.

Example:

```
Initially:
   s"fooooooooooo ${baaaaaaaaaar} baaaaaaaaaz ${qoooooooooooo} quuuuuuuz"
   <------------------------------ISClosed------------------------------> 
After segmentation and relexing:
   s"fooooooooooo ${baaaaaaaaaar} baaaaaaaaaz ${qoooooooooooo} quuuuuuuz"
   <--ISBegin------><--varid---><--ISClosed----><---varid--->-<--ISEnd--> 
``` 

Now we add the following production rules to the parser:

```
exp -> interpolatedStringClosed
exp -> interpolatedStringBegin exp { interpolatedStringClosed exp } interpolatedStringEnd
```

Something similar should work for multiline strings (do we have a specification for their lexical syntax?).

Author: ahh your comment just made the difference between Lexer.x and Parser.y click for me. I wasn't really sure what the difference was 😅 I was also unsure if it was possible to re-lex in the parser; how would that work in GHC? Or are you suggesting the re-lex might happen in a later step, like renaming?

Yeah, the specification for multiline strings is here: https://github.com/brandonchinn178/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0569-multiline-strings.rst#bnf

I pushed a new commit with some changes. Probably still needs work, but let me know if it's trending in the right direction

Note: We will always require interpolation to be of the form ``${foo}``, unlike other languages where ``$foo`` is allowed for single-variable interpolation. This simplifies the syntax and avoids the need for escaping bare ``$``. Interpolation may be avoided by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``s"\${foo}"`` is equivalent to ``"${foo}"``.

The following expressions are lex errors, according to the above grammar:

* ``s"a ${} b"``

  * Expression is missing

* ``s"a ${=} b"``

  * Not an expression

* ``s"a ${let x =} b"``

  * Incomplete expression

* ``s"a ${{b} c"``

  * The second ``{`` is not a valid character to start an expression

See the "Semantics" and "Examples" sections to see examples of valid interpolated strings.

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

An interpolated string expression desugars to calls to ``fromBuilder``, ``toBuilder``, and ``interpolate``, which are defined as:

::

  -- | Laws:
  --     * fromBuilder . toBuilder === id
  --     * toBuilder . fromBuilder === id
  class Monoid (Builder s) => Buildable s where
    type Builder s = r | r -> s
    toBuilder :: s -> Builder s
    fromBuilder :: Builder s -> s

  class Buildable s => Interpolate a s where

>     interpolate :: a -> Builder s

Reviewer 8: So this class is basically just a class of lawless conversions to string-y things. Do we really need this so much? The alternative is to have the conversions to the string type be explicit, e.g.
```
  let textExample = s"${show name1} (age: ${show age1}) encountered ${show name2} (age: ${show age2})"
```
or similarly with `tshow :: Show a => a -> Text` function.

I appreciate that the current design allows things to more often "just work", but I think the extra cost to be explicit here is not so bad, and it also makes it very easy to change the formatting of an individual item on a case-by-case basis.

Author: IMO that would render proposal almost completely useless.

2. It would add a ton of noise to string interpolation, so no one would use the feature
1. It wouldnt support injection-free SqlQuery, as you need to know which SqlValue to use
3. It wouldn't support escaping html by default, while allowing explicitly marking certain strings as safe raw html

I'd rather the proposal be rejected than only allow interpolating strings

Semantics
~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  fromBuilder $
    toBuilder "foo "
    <> interpolate (f a b) <> toBuilder " bar "
    <> interpolate (g x)   <> toBuilder " baz "
    <> interpolate name    <> toBuilder ""

The string literals there will be handled by ``-XOverloadedStrings`` as usual, if enabled.

Interpolated multiline strings should desugar into a single-line string `as usual <https://github.com/brandonchinn178/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0569-multiline-strings.rst>`_ first, before interpolating expressions.

::

  let x = "hello"

  -- original string
  let str0 =
        s"""
        ${x} world
        world ${x}
        ${x} world
        """

  -- resolve multiline string
  let str1 = s"${x} world\nworld ${x}\n${x} world"

  -- resolve interpolation
  let str2 = "hello world\nworld hello\nhello world"

Examples

> --------

Reviewer 13: A thing I think is lacking in existing interpolation (but that IIRC python's f-strings do quite well), is the ability to control how a value is formatted. E.g. "this `Day` should be formatted like Thu, 8 Aug 2024" or "this `Float` should have 2 decimal places".

I don't think this proposal needs to enable that kind of thing, but is it worth briefly discussing how it might look given this proposal plus some other library? E.g. I'm imagining

    s"today is ${Fmt "%a, %d %b %Y" todaysDate}"
    s"finished in ${Fmt ".2" durationSecs} seconds"

where some library provides relevant instances for `Fmt`.

The point isn't to figure out exactly how this use case should be handled, but to show that there is at least some reasonable way of handling this use case.

Reviewer 3: You can use use custom formatting functions in conjunction with the `&` operator: `s"today is ${date & fmt "%a, %d %b %Y"}`

Reviewer: If you use a module with interpolable data types, Fmt is an unnecessary intermediate step, since you can have data types that do the equivalent of .2 etc: `s"finished in ${Fmt.Prec 2 durationSecs} seconds"`. This leaves less room for errors in specifiers or how they're used, or places where it doesn't make sense to interpolate with such specifiers.

Author: Added some examples

Reviewer 13: Note that for floats, you might want to specify: total width; precision after decimal point; whether to have a `+` for positives or not; whether to left-pad with 0 or space; whether to use `,` or `_` or nothing to separate groups of digits; and whether to use `%f`, `%g` or `%e` style formatting.

So if I'm looking at this and wondering whether I'll be able to do what I want in a way that feels reasonable, the current example doesn't feel very compelling.

And in fact, with the current design, I think the answer is no: because I can't have a `"` inside `${ }`, I can't do what I want in a way that feels reasonable. Number formatting feels like it would be awkward, and date formatting seems completely off the table.

I think I'd be satisfied with examples showing me that I can do these two things, in a way that doesn't feel like I'm jumping through hoops:

* Render a `Day` with a specific date format like `%a, %d %b %Y`.
* Render a `Float` similarly to `printf "%+8.2f"`.

To be clear, the thing I'm looking for from examples here is:

* Here's a thing someone might reasonably want to do;
* Here's a way that might reasonably look, if someone implemented a library to do so.

I don't think you need to show how that library would be implemented, as long as it seems clear that it could be.

Examples were tested with `this gist <https://gist.github.com/brandonchinn178/4d35ed189d7018ca34535ac85442790b>`_ (after desugaring the string interpolation).

Edge cases
~~~~~~~~~~

> The following interpolated string expressions are also valid:

Reviewer 13: It used to be the case that an unmatched `}` would immediately close the `${}`. Is that still the case? Worth being explicit about.

I'd suggest including the following edge cases (I'm not sure if they're valid):

```
s"foo ${'}'} bar" (does it try to lex `'` by itself?)
s"foo ${'{'} bar" (because the `}` is matched, does it keep looking for the closing `}` until it gets to the end?)
s"foo ${ expr -- line comment } bar"
s"foo ${ expr {- inline comment -} } bar"

Author: Thanks, I'll add some more examples.

No, it's no longer the case that an unmatched `}` immediately closes. Instead, an expression is parsed as much as it can, then if there's no more expression, we expect a closing `}`.

The major drawback of this approach is the typeclass instances problem:

#. A new interpolator type (e.g. ``SqlQuery``) needs to define ``Builder`` and ``Interpolate`` for all known interpolatable types
#. A new interpolatable type (e.g. ``BigDecimal``) needs to define ``Interpolate`` for all known interpolator types

This is worse than ``IsString`` or ``Show`` due to the multi-param ``Interpolate`` type class. This makes ``Interpolate`` much more susceptible to orphan instances.

One minor drawback is that whitespace is now important with this syntax, with ``s"foo"`` semantically different from ``s "foo"``. While there's precedent for this (Template Haskell splices make ``$(...)`` different from ``$ (...)``), this is the first instance where whitespace matters for an alphanumeric identifier. But IMO this isn't that big of a deal:

#. It's unlikely for someone to be naming a function as ``s`` in the first place
#. Prefixing string literals like ``s"..."`` is common in other languages: Python, Scala, Javascript/Typescript, etc.
#. Easily mitigatable: just add a space, which improves readability anyway

> Alternatives

Reviewer 13: I think it's worth briefly mentioning other possible designs, like the ones found in other interpolation libraries.

Author: I added a few comments, but the bulk of the design work found in other interpolation libraries is how to indicate placeholders and put the values back into the placeholders. With this work being done in the compiler, we don't need to do anything fancy here outside of `<>`, so I'm not sure how much we could bring in from other libraries here

This proposal introduces a new ``-XStringInterpolation`` extension that enables the following changes.

Lexical Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add ``interpolatedString`` and ``interpolatedStringMultiline`` to ``lexeme`` (not ``literal``, because they're not literals):

.. code-block:: abnf

  lexeme  → qvarid | qconid | qvarsym | qconsym
          | literal | special | reservedop | reservedid
          | interpolatedString
          | interpolatedStringMultiline

  interpolatedString → 's"' {graphic⟨'\' | '"' | '${'⟩ | space | escape | gap | '${' any⟨'}' | '"'⟩ '}'} '"'
  interpolatedStringMultiline → 's"""' {{whitechar} interpolatedStringMultilineLine} '"""'
  interpolatedStringMultilineLine → {graphic⟨'\' | '"""' | '${'⟩ | space | escape | gap | '${' ANY⟨'}' | '"'⟩ '}'}

Also add ``$`` to ``charesc``:

.. code-block:: abnf

  charesc → a | b | f | n | r | t | v | \ | " | ' | & | $

With ``$`` added to ``charesc``, interpolation can be avoided by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``s"\${foo}" == "${foo}"``.

The following expressions are lex errors:

* ``s"a ${"hello"} c"``

  * This would lex the string ``s"a ${"``, then fail expecting a closing ``}``

* ``s"a ${s"hello"} c"``

>   * This would lex the string ``s"a ${s"``, then fail expecting a closing ``}``

Reviewer 3: Much better already. But reading up on https://peps.python.org/pep-0701/ (thanks for sticking our noses into it, @gkleen!), I think we might get away without the "re-lexing" pass, as follows.

My idea crucially builds on the fact that GHC's Lexer already maintains a stack of state numbers (simple integers), and the Lexer generator `alex` has special support for those as well.
Alas, it turns out that the string lexer is [hand-coded anyway (horrible indeed)](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/blob/610840eb5bf6bd59417b82cc61e74aeaacbe5462/compiler/GHC/Parser/Lexer.x#L2184-2187), so we should not focus too much on the DFS declarations accepted by `alex`.

First off, keep `charesc` as is, but remove `interpolatedString`. (What I outline below always applies to `interpolatedMultilineString` as well.)

Second, define the token types

```
 isbegin → 's"'
 isend → '"'
 isinter → '$' '{'
 ismiddle → {graphic⟨'\' | '"' | isinter⟩ | space | escape | gap}
```

although `ismiddle` is nearly just `string⟨'$' '{'⟩`, but with additional quotes. perhaps  we should factor

```
  stringchar → graphic⟨'\' | '"'⟩ | space | escape | gap
  string → '"' {stringchar} '"'
  ismiddle → {stringchar⟨isinter⟩}
```

much better IMO.

The lexer is specified as follows, using two new lexer states `<istring>` and `<iexp>`:

1. After lexing `isbegin`, we push the new state `<istring>` onto the state stack that is active until the closing `isend` is lexed.
2. In state `<istring>`, only `ismiddle`, `isend` or `isinter` (the character sequence `${`) can be lexed.
3. When `isend` is lexed, we *pop* the lexer state and finish parsing of the string.
3. When `ismiddle` is lexed, we do not alter the lex state and remain in `<istring>`.
4. When `isinter` is lexed, we push a *new* lexer state `<iexp>`.
5. In state `<iexp>`, we basically proceed as in state `<0>`, which requires adding `iexp` to the respective lexer actions. There is one important difference, though: When we lex a token `}`, we pop the lexer state and go back into state `<istring>`.

With this, nested occurrences of `s"..${..}.."` should just lex correctly. The char literal '}' should lex correctly as well.
The only use case that is not supported is regular use of `}` in expressions, but that seems like a very minor drawback.

---

Here is the example from the PEP 701 adapted for our proposal:

```
s"some words ${x} more words ${'}'} final words"
```

this should result in the following token stream as per the lexer specified above:

```
isbegin - 's"'
ismiddle - 'some words '
isinter - '${'
qvarid - 'x'
ccurly - '}'
ismiddle - ' more words '
isinter - '${'
char - ''}''
ccurly - '}'
ismiddle - ' final words'
isend - '"'
```

---

The parser (section 2.2) will reconstruct a parse tree from this lexical syntax according to the following production rules:

```
isstring → isbegin { ismiddle | isinter exp '}' } isend
```

(I think the definition of `isend` is superfluous and we could just use the regular token `"`.)

---

I think this is much nicer, without any need for "re-lexing". 
The only question is: does the specification have an implementation (in `GHC.Parser.String.lexString`)?

An interpolated string expression desugars to calls to ``fromBuilder``, ``toBuilder``, and ``interpolate``, which are defined as:

::

  -- | Laws:
  --     * fromBuilder . toBuilder === id
  class Monoid (Builder s) => Buildable s where
    type Builder s = r | r -> s
    toBuilder :: s -> Builder s
    fromBuilder :: Builder s -> s

  class Buildable s => Interpolate a s where
    interpolate :: a -> Builder s

Instances for ``String`` will be defined as well:

::

  newtype StringBuilder = StringBuilder (Endo String)
    deriving newtype (Semigroup, Monoid)

  instance Buildable String where
    type Builder String = StringBuilder
    toBuilder s = StringBuilder (Endo (s ++))
    fromBuilder (StringBuilder (Endo f)) = f []

  instance Interpolate String String where
    interpolate = toBuilder
  instance Interpolate Char String where
    interpolate = interpolate . (:[])
  instance {-# OVERLAPPABLE #-} Show a => Interpolate a String where
    interpolate = StringBuilder . Endo . shows

This design allows interpolating anything, even user-defined types, into a ``String`` with ``Show``, but can be overridden for specific types. See the "Examples" section for more details.

> These definitions would initially be implemented in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``GHC.Exts`` alongside ``IsString``.

Reviewer 6: `GHC.Exts` is actually in `base` (but IMHO should be deprecated and more fine-grained modules used instead).

Wired-in definitions should indeed all live somewhere in `ghc-internal`; exactly where is an implementation detail that need not be specified. The proposal should specify that they get exposed to users via a named module in `ghc-experimental` (perhaps something like `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`?).

> These definitions would initially be implemented in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``GHC.Exts`` alongside ``IsString``.

Author: As @adamgundry said, `GHC.Exts` is in base, which is why someone suggested moving it into `ghc-experimental`

> The proposal should specify that they get exposed to users via a named module in `ghc-experimental` (perhaps something like `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`?).

Is that not specified here?
```
These definitions would initially be implemented in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate``.
```

> These definitions would initially be implemented in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``GHC.Exts`` alongside ``IsString``.

Reviewer 4: I think since this was written things have changed and as I understand it, new things are no longer being added to `GHC.Exts`, see: https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/283 and https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/25242

Template Haskell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Template Haskell will add a new constructor:

::

  InterpolatedStringE String [(Exp, String)]

Which mimics the ``HsInterpolatedString`` constructor.

Examples
--------

Examples were tested with `this gist <https://gist.github.com/brandonchinn178/4d35ed189d7018ca34535ac85442790b>`_ (after desugaring the string interpolation).

Multiline strings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

  let x = "hello"

  -- original string
  let str0 =
        s"""
        ${x} world
        world ${x}
        ${x} world
        """

  -- resolve multiline string
  let str1 = s"${x} world\nworld ${x}\n${x} world"

  -- resolve interpolation
  let str2 = "hello world\nworld hello\nhello world"

Edge cases
~~~~~~~~~~

The following interpolated string expressions are also valid:

::

  let x = "hello"

  -- seemingly duplicated closing bracket is valid, as the first one closes the expression
  -- and the second is a character in the string literal
  s"${x}} world" == "hello} world"

  -- inline type annotation
  s"a ${1 :: Int} b" == "a 1 b"

  -- multiline expressions: while ugly and should be avoided, valid syntax
  s"""
   foo ${drop
    1

>     x} world

Reviewer 13: IMO it's correct for the common whitespace calculation to be done before interpolations. When looking at the code, I don't want to have to figure out "does this line start inside an interpolation" to know how big the common prefix is. (But it probably won't come up much, so I'm not too fussed.)

A related question here is: if we allow multiline strings inside interpolations, how does that work? E.g.

```
s"""
..line1
......${"""
........line2
....line3
........"""} line4
....line5
"""
```

I don't think we need anything tricky here. The interpolated string becomes

```
....line2
line3
```

and the whole thing becomes

```
line1
........line2
line3 line4
..line5
```

But I suppose it needs to be specified.

  interpolateRealFloat (Prec scale n) =
    let (digits, e) = floatToDigits 10 n
        (int, frac) = splitAt e digits
     in interpolate . concat $ map show int <> ["."] <> (map show . take scale) (frac <> repeat 0)

  let x = 1.2 :: Double
  s"${Prec 3 x}" == "1.200"

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, string interpolation can be used for any ``Buildable`` type. Otherwise, it will only ever build Strings.

Interpolation is also supported with ``-XMultilineStrings``, as described in "Proposed Change Specification".

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------

Development should be low-effort, maintenance should be low-effort. Learnability for novice users will go up, since novice users probably expect string interpolation to be available, and might be frustrated at the lack of support currently.

The major drawback of this approach is the typeclass instances problem:

#. A new interpolator type (e.g. ``SqlQuery``) needs to define ``Builder`` and ``Interpolate`` for all known interpolatable types
#. A new interpolatable type (e.g. ``BigDecimal``) needs to define ``Interpolate`` for all known interpolator types

> This is worse than ``IsString`` or ``Show`` due to the multi-param ``Interpolate`` type class. This makes ``Interpolate`` much more susceptible to orphan instances.

Author: One example that I hit was I wanted to be able to do:
```hs
instance Interpolate String s => Interpolate BigDecimal s where
```

  instance Buildable String where
    type Builder String = StringBuilder
    toBuilder s = StringBuilder (Endo (s ++))
    fromBuilder (StringBuilder (Endo f)) = f []

  instance Interpolate String String where
    interpolate = toBuilder
  instance Interpolate Char String where
    interpolate = interpolate . (:[])
  instance {-# OVERLAPPABLE #-} Show a => Interpolate a String where
    interpolate = StringBuilder . Endo . shows

This design allows interpolating anything, even user-defined types, into a ``String`` with ``Show``, but can be overridden for specific types. See the "Examples" section for more details.

These definitions would initially be implemented in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``GHC.Exts`` alongside ``IsString``.

Expansion
~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  fromBuilder $
    toBuilder "foo "
    <> interpolate (f a b) <> toBuilder " bar "
    <> interpolate (g x)   <> toBuilder " baz "

>     <> interpolate name    <> toBuilder ""

Reviewer 8: Is the implication that there will always be literal strings surrounding any interpolation? Does that mean that ```"${x}${y}"``` becomes ```toBuilder "" <> interpolate x <> toBuilder "" <> interpolate y <> toBuilder ""```?

Author: That was the original design, yes, but there might be changes here

Reviewer 3: Note that for strings, there can be no semantic difference between `fromBuilder (toBuilder "" <> interpolate x)` and `fromBuilder (interpolate x)` due to the laws associated with `Buildable`:

```
fromBuilder (toBuilder "" <> interpolate x)
=== { monoid homo }
fromBuilder (toBuilder "") <> fromBuilder (interpolate x)
=== { embedding }
"" <> fromBuilder (interpolate x)
=== { "" is neutral element of <> }
fromBuilder (interpolate x)
```

So the exact specification does not matter for `String`.

It matters for other `Interpolate` instances, though.. (about to take reference to this reply in https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#discussion_r1713033502).

  s"${x}} world" == "hello} world"

  -- inline type annotation
  s"a ${1 :: Int} b" == "a 1 b"

  -- multiline expressions: while ugly and should be avoided, valid syntax
  s"""
   foo ${drop
    1
    x} world
   """ == "foo ello world"

  -- braces as characters
  s"foo ${'{'} bar" == "foo { bar"

  -- comments
  s"foo ${x -- comment} bar" == "foo hello bar"

  -- OverloadedRecordDot
  let user = User{name = "Alice"}
  s"foo ${user.name} bar" == "foo Alice bar"

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

An existing program containing ``s"..."`` will break when ``-XStringInterpolation`` is enabled. While there's precedent for this (Template Haskell splices make ``$(...)`` different from ``$ (...)``), this is the first instance where whitespace matters for an alphanumeric identifier. But this is not a big deal:

#. It's unlikely for someone to be naming a function as ``s`` in the first place
#. Easily mitigatable: just add a space, which improves readability anyway
#. Prefixing string literals like ``s"..."`` is common in other languages: Python, Scala, Javascript/Typescript, etc. so it shouldn't be a big hurdle for newcomers

> When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, string interpolation can be used for any ``Buildable`` type. Otherwise, it will only ever build Strings.

Reviewer 8: I think they have to also always be `IsString`, if interpolated strings always include parts for some empty string literals?

Author: Ah right. That's why my initial proposal had the equivalent of `interpolateRaw :: String -> Builder s`. If seems like keeping `toBuilder :: s -> Builder s` would also require the type to have `IsString` in order to use `-XStringInterpolation`. Is that right @sgraf812? Is that what we want?

Reviewer 8: It seems totally reasonable to me. It would be kind of a weird side effect to be able to use string interpolation syntax for things that were `Buildable` but not `IsString`.

Reviewer 3: I agree it would be weird to require `str` in `s" foo " :: str` to be `IsString str`, but not in `s"" :: str` or `s"${x}${y}"`.

So perhaps we should unconditionally require `IsString` on the string type in the presence of `-XOverloadedStrings`. This has the important benefit that we do not have to specify any defaulting rules, because `str` is already defaulted according to the `IsString` rules. (The proposal should mention this in Effects and Interactions.)

There is the question of whether `IsString` should be a superclass of `Interpolate` then.

(A proposal that would be interesting but out of scope here would be to add an additional method `buildString :: String -> Builder s`  to `Interpolate` with the property that `buildString = toBuilder . fromString` and the long-term goal to deprecate `fromString` and `IsString` with this more efficient method. But that does not solve any of the bemourned problems  of `IsString`, I suppose.)

  * This would complicate the syntax, and would also require interpolated string to escape bare ``$``.

* Different delimiter

  * Could use ``f"`` like Python, with ``f`` for format. ``s`` for "String" seems a bit ad-hoc, but it does "look better" for some reason. ``s`` is also a bit better if the user forgets to enable ``-XStringInterpolation`` because ``f`` is a not-uncommon name for functions and ``f"asdf"``, being parsed as ``f "asdf"``, would work more often than ``s"asdf"`` would.
  * Could reuse QuasiQuote syntax, e.g. ``[s|`` or ``[fmt|``, except it would be special and NOT use Template Haskell.

* No delimiter, always interpolate

  * Would require any use of ``${...}`` to be escaped.
  * No other language does this; even Bash has single quoted strings to avoid escaping

* Different interpolation delimiter, e.g. ``#{foo}``

  * Most languages use ``$``, and I see no reason to deviate

* Only allow interpolating string-like values

  * This is what ``neat-interpolation`` does
  * This would add a ton of noise to string interpolation, so no one would use the feature
  * This wouldn't support injection-free SqlQuery, as you need to know which SqlValue to use

>   * This wouldn't support escaping HTML by default, while allowing explicitly marking certain strings as safe raw HTML

Author: ah I misunderstood your argument. You're saying that instead of
```hs
s"a ${x}" == fromBuilder (toBuilder "a " <> interpolate x)
```
you want just
```hs
s"a ${x}" == fromBuilder (toBuilder "a " <> x)
```
When you initially said "string type being interpolated", I thought you were implying that everything would interpolate as String.

Yes, I agree that'd still be safe, and is a perfectly reasonable alternative. It would still be better than what we have today. However, I do think it'd be nicer to have this out of the box, and the user could always go the `stringToHTML` route if they wanted to avoid the implicit conversions. So I'd slightly prefer providing `Interpolate`, but if the committee would reject it otherwise, I'd be fine removing it. What's the best way to encode that in the proposal?

>   * This wouldn't support escaping HTML by default, while allowing explicitly marking certain strings as safe raw HTML

Reviewer 8: I mostly just want it clearly described as an alternative, since I think it's an important one to at least _think_ about! I think you get what I was going at now, so I'm happy for you to just describe it :)

>   * This wouldn't support escaping HTML by default, while allowing explicitly marking certain strings as safe raw HTML

Reviewer 8: To be clear, what I'm proposing would be
```
s"a ${x}" == fromBuilder (toBuilder "a " <> toBuilder x)
```
i.e. you interpolate in values of the final type, not the builders!

* Reuse ``PrintfArg``

  * Would only allow converting to strings, see "Only allow interpolating string-like values"

* Only allow interpolating to string (which can ultimately be lifted to any IsString)

  * Simplifies the machinery, but makes the feature much less flexible and extendable

Unresolved Questions
--------------------

Implementation Plan
-------------------

I can implement

Endorsements
------------

> Appendix

Reviewer 8: `prettyprinter` could maybe make another interesting example?

  * Pro: no more ``Interpolate`` class
  * Pro: more explicit, e.g. the way you have to explicitly convert before calling ``+``
  * Pro: less likely to encounter type inference issues
  * Con: adds more noise to interpolate
  * This is what ``neat-interpolation`` does

* Reuse ``PrintfArg``

  * Would only allow converting to strings, see "Only allow interpolating string-like values"

* Only allow interpolating to string (which can ultimately be lifted to any IsString)

  * Simplifies the machinery, but makes the feature much less flexible and extendable

* Desugar to a function

  * like ``printf``: ``s"a %s b %s" foo bar => (\x0 x1 -> "a " <> interpolate x0 <> " b " <> interpolate x1) foo bar``
  * or like ``formatting``: ``s"a {text} b {int}" foo bar => (\x0 x1 -> "a " <> text x0 <> " b " <> int x1) foo bar``
  * This defeats the purpose of string interpolation making it easy to see the exact location a variable gets injected. If you're interpolating a lot of values into a large string (e.g. with multiline strings), it's extremely difficult to match up which expression to which interpolation position.

Unresolved Questions

> --------------------

Author: Does the "Template Haskell" section (2.6) answer your questions?

Yes, `$(someTH)` is a valid expression, so it's supported for free by the current spec

  s"<h1>${title}</h1>${RawHtml body}"
    == Html "<h1>Why is 1 &gt; 0?</h1><p>Hello world</p>"

Custom interpolatable type: BigDecimal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Imagine a library implements a new ``BigDecimal`` type:

::

  data BigDecimal = BigDecimal Integer Int

  renderBigDecimal :: BigDecimal -> String
  renderBigDecimal (BigDecimal digits scale) =
    let (int, frac) = splitAt scale (show digits)
     in int <> "." <> frac

That library could define the following instances:

::

  instance Interpolate BigDecimal String where
    interpolate = interpolate . renderBigDecimal
  instance Interpolate BigDecimal Text where
    interpolate = interpolate . Text.pack . renderBigDecimal

And be able to use it in interpolated strings:

::

  let n = BigDecimal 123456 3
  s"123456 / 10^3 = ${n}" == "123456 / 10^3 = 123.456"

Format specifiers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Python is famous for being able to specify format specifiers when interpolating values:

.. code-block:: python

  x = 1.2
  f"{x:.3f}" == "1.200"

This can be done in a couple ways in user-land:

* Provide functions that format ``Int`` to ``String``, then interpolate that string

> * Add custom data types that implement ``Interpolate``

Reviewer 13: To be clear, this still doesn't satisfy what I'm looking for from this section. Here's a stab at what I'd like to see. (Continuing on from after the code block.)

---

This would be provided by libraries, and the design and implementation of those libraries is not specified here. But from a user perspective, here's one possible way such a library could be used:

```
let today :: Day = fromGregorian 2024 08 12
 in s"Today's date is ${Fmt "%a, %d %b %Y" today}."

let earned = -13.2 :: Float
    total = 127.978 :: Float
 in s"""
      Points earned: ${Fmt "+8.2" earned}
      Current total: ${Fmt "+8.2" total}
    """
```

Where these would return the strings:

```
Today's date is Mon, 12 Aug 2024.

Points earned:   -13.20
Current total:  +127.98
```

Reviewer 8: Note that with my proposal you just need to replace your `Fmt` with a function `fmt`! All very straightforward!

::

  data HsExpr p
    = ...
    | HsInterpolatedString [Either FastString (LHsExpr p)]

which contains the prefix of the interpolated string up to the first interpolated expression, then a list containing pairs of an interpolated expression and the subsequent string.

Interpolated multiline strings will desugar to an interpolated single-line string in the lexer, the same `as usual <https://github.com/brandonchinn178/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0569-multiline-strings.rst>`_. So the parser will also get a ``HsInterpolatedString`` here (with the appropriate metadata in the extension field).

The following expressions are parse errors:

* ``s"a ${} b"``

  * Expression is missing

* ``s"a ${=} b"``

  * Not an expression

* ``s"a ${let x =} b"``

  * Incomplete expression

* ``s"a ${{b} c"``

  * The second ``{`` is not a valid character to start an expression

* ``s"a ${'}'} b"``

  * This would try to lex the expression ``'``

* ``s"foo ${x {- inline comment -} } bar"``

  * This would try to lex the expression ``x {- inline comment -``

* ``s"foo ${User{id = 123}} bar"``

>   * This would try to lex the expression ``User{id = 123``

Reviewer 14: I feel like these should be allowed, they're normal expressions (that happen to use braces). Scala also supports using braces inside the interpolated expression without problems.

See the "Semantics" and "Examples" sections to see examples of valid interpolated strings.

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

The machinery should satisfy the following requirements:

* Allows constructing any type, not just String or String-like types

  * See the "SqlQuery" or "HTML" examples

* Allows interpolating any type, not just String

>   * Interpolate Showable things with show by default

Reviewer 10: I think "constructing any type, not just stringlikes" and "interpolate Showable things by default" should not both be present in the final design. Otherwise you are requiring a conversion from String to whatever other interpolable type, and presumably that's stringlike in some way.

With ``$`` added to ``charesc``, interpolation can be avoided by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``s"\${foo}" == "${foo}"``.

Context-Free Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.5 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-18000010.5>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

.. code-block:: abnf

  aexp → qvar
       | ...
       | istring
       | istringMultiline
       | modid . istring
       | modid . istringMultiline

  istring →
    istringBegin
      {istringRaw | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose}
      istringEnd

  istringMultiline →
    istringMultilineBegin
      {istringMultilineRawStartLine | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose istringMultilineRawMidLine}
      istringMultilineEnd

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``GHC.Exts`` alongside ``IsString``.

::

  interpolateString ::
    (IsString s, Monoid s) =>
    ( (forall a. Interpolate a => a -> s)
      -> (s -> s)
      -> (s -> s -> s)
      -> s
      -> s
    )
    -> s

>   interpolateString f = f (fromString . interpolate) id mappend mempty

Reviewer 2: this is different from the high level overview. Confusing.

Author: Yes, good catch, I forgot to update the overview. Will update.

RE: your top-level comment - That only works for `String`, since `ShowS` assumes the accumulator is also `String`. The current design immediately converts to `Text` or whatever the string-like type is, and the final string-like type has control over mappend.

Author: If your Builder is an `IsString`, you can just use interpolation syntax as usual and give it the Builder type

Reviewer 2: @brandonchinn178 see my previous comment. I repeat

> But even then, even if you are building Builder with current framework, you'll be forced to build your converted Builder via String which isn't optimal at all.

Reviewer 4: I don't think the implict-builder one actually solves this problem. It does solve it if we assume users are only writing single instances of interpolated strings, but the problem resurfaces if they nest them or try to compose them.
EG:
- `"foo ${"foo ${x} bar"} bar"` 
- `"foo ${x} bar" <> "foo ${y} bar"`

Author: @s-and-witch Can you clarify this:

> Now we are left with a suboptimal solution that leaves powerful users unsatisfied

My proposal was that power users can use the qualified literal syntax for more complex scenarios like builders and more advanced interpolators. See the SqlQuery example in the appendix

Reviewer 2: @brandonchinn178 

The (++) for Strings and (<>) for Text are both *quadratic* i.e. O(n)

If you have m operations, your cost is O(m*n) i.e. becomes "quadratic". `.` for `ShowS` is O(1). Only if you are careful to right-associate everything (which won't happen when things are split).

---

The 

> But even then, even if you are building Builder with current framework, you'll be forced to build your converted Builder via String which isn't optimal at all.

comment is still unaddressed. If I'm building a `Test.Builder` I don't want render `Double`s via `String` which is converted to `Text.Builder`, I want to use [`Builder.realFloat`](https://hackage-content.haskell.org/package/text-2.1.3/docs/Data-Text-Lazy-Builder-RealFloat.html#v:realFloat).

If the answer to this problem is "use qualified syntax", then the `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental` implementation may well be completely `String` specific (i.e. work on `ShowS` internally).

Author: @phadej Ah yes you're right. And actually, it just clicked for me, not sure why I didn't think of this before. Presumably, we'd want an Interpolate instance for lists like

```hs
instance Interpolate a => Interpolate [a] where
  interpolate as = = "[" ++ (intercalate ", " . map interpolate) as ++ "]"
```

Separate from whether we want to join with `ShowS` in the overall string interpolation, we want the option to use `ShowS` _within_ a single `interpolate` call, or else we get quadratic behavior with recursive data structures.

Apologies for missing this, thanks for pushing on this. I'll update the proposal to:
```hs
interpolateString f = fromString $ f interpolateS showString (.) id ""

class Interpolate a where
  {-# MINIMAL interpolate | interpolateS #-}
  interpolate :: a -> String
  interpolate x = interpolateS x ""

  interpolateS :: a -> ShowS
  interpolateS x s = interpolate x <> s
```

This enables the following:
* Recursive data structures can have linear runtime, staying within the builder the entire time
* Non-recursive data structures can just implement the simpler `interpolate` interface
* `-XOverloadedStrings` still works, although it might be less performant than a dedicated `-XQualifiedStrings` implementation (since it builds the String first, then converts last)

This doesn't solve your `Text.Builder` scenario, but the answer to that is, indeed, `QualifiedStrings`.

---

@Jashweii I'm not sure I understand your proposal. Please move to a separate thread, and provide more details. Specifically, I'm not sure how I'd use your hlist interpolation in `interpolateString`

Author: @phadej I'm still not convinced about your argument for using `interpolateS` in `interpolateString`. After desugaring, the two options on the table are:

```hs
-- s"${v1}s1${v2}s2"

fromString (interpolate v1) <> "s1" <> fromString (interpolate v2) <> "s2" <> mempty

fromString $ (interpolateS v1 . showString "s1" . interpolateS v2 . showString "s2" . id) ""
```

You're right in that the thing inside the parentheses is O(1) with `interpolateS`, but the overall expression is still O(n), since you're finalizing the ShowS into a String. This is the same as the first expression, since (++) is right associative (and the compiler's generating this code, so we can guarantee that it'll be right associative).

I don't see a difference with nested interpolated strings either. Without `-XOverloadedStrings`, you can only ever build String, so you're forced into quadratic cause you're dealing with finalized strings. With `-XOverloadedStrings` and an appropriate `Builder` type implementing `IsString`, in both cases, you build to a String before converting into the Builder.

The only way I see to get performant builders is by implementing your own with QualifiedStrings

Reviewer 15: @phadej 
> The `(++)` for Strings and `(<>)` for Text are both _quadratic_ i.e. O(n) ....
> `.` for `ShowS` is O(1).

Why are you trying us to guess how to implement such interpolation? Just write here your "ideal" example with O(1).

Reviewer 16: > My proposal was that power users can use the qualified literal syntax for more complex scenarios like builders

Wait. Hold on. Builders aren't "more complex scenarios". Builders should be the "sane performant default".
The syntax ought to make good decisions easier and penalize the wicked/dangerous/incorrect. Not the vice versa.

Reviewer 17: > @TeofilC wrote:
> I don't think the implicit-builder one actually solves this problem.
> ...
> s"foo ${s"foo ${x} bar"} bar"

1) implicit-builder still covers simpler and more frequent scenarios
2) I guess making `{-# RULE toBuilder . fromBuilder = id #-}` is much easier and more reliable (and I believe each library already has such rules) than `{-# RULE toBuilder . fromString . whatever happens there . toString . fromBuilder = id #-}`
3) Regarding your other example, it's no worse than the usual <> and I'm not going to fight against <>

---

> @brandonchinn178 wrote:
> can you clarify this:
> ...
> My proposal was that power users can use the qualified literal syntax for more complex scenarios...

> @dpwiz replied:
> The syntax ought to make good decisions easier and penalize the wicked/dangerous/incorrect

Exactly! One more thing I want to add: I'm talking about "power users" who are going to __implement__ this API, i.e., library authors. Such power users should be able to implement the API in a way that allows library users to use standard syntax and not have to enable -XQualifiedLiterals in each simple case if they don't want to implicitly ruin performance. It's another bit of know-how that punishes newcomers.

Just imagine this like a SO Q&A thread:

Q: My program is insanely slow... I'm just using string interpolation to template text files...
A: In Haskell, nobody uses simple interpolation; it's widely considered harmful. Use qualified syntax instead.

Author: Ok so now I understand that implicit-builder does improve performance for nested string interpolations.

```hs
let s1 = s"a ${b}"
let s2 = s"c ${d}"
let s3 = s"${s1}${s2}"
```

s3 would evaluate to
```hs
fromBuilder $ interpolate s1 <> interpolate s2

-- interpolate = toBuilder for String
fromBuilder $ toBuilder s1 <> toBuilder s2

-- inline s1/s2
fromBuilder $ toBuilder (fromBuilder $ s1_builder) <> toBuilder (fromBuilder $ s2_builder)

-- toBuilder . fromBuilder ==> id
fromBuilder $ s1_builder <> s2_builder
```

The rewrite allows evaluating everything as Builder, even though everything is typed as String. This does assume the nested strings get inlined in order for the rewrite to trigger. I also wonder if we need an explicit rewrite rule; presumably the functions toBuilder/fromBuilder call would have their own rewrite rule.

With just that example, I'll consider implicit-builder again. But just to be clear, are there any non-nested situations where implicit-builder has better performance than the current proposal? To my knowledge, since we righr associate all the appends, a flat interpolation should be linear, even without a builder.

> A: In Haskell, nobody uses simple interpolation; it's widely considered harmful. Use qualified syntax instead.

To be fair, String is already widely known to have poor performance. String interpolation is just inheriting that. If you have a non-trivial app that cared about performance, you'd be using Text already, and you wouldn't be having this problem. (phadej mentioned Text is still quadratic, but I still don't see how that is)

If you're just playing around and using String, your program taking a couple more seconds to run because you have a couple nested string interpolations isn't the end of the world.

Author: @s-and-witch So my hypothesis is that if you actually write out the full code, GHC will optimize it better than a programmatically generated interpolation. I tried testing my hypothesis here: https://github.com/brandonchinn178/ghc-string-interpolation-prototypes/compare/main...benchmark

I'm seeing the same performance for both implicit-builder and implicit-no-builder, which does validate my hypothesis, but I strongly suspect I'm doing something wrong instead. Can you double check my work?

```
benchmarking String_depth5_len5
time                 17.86 ms   (17.65 ms .. 18.11 ms)
                     0.999 R²   (0.999 R² .. 1.000 R²)
mean                 17.97 ms   (17.83 ms .. 18.18 ms)
std dev              391.4 μs   (254.9 μs .. 677.9 μs)

benchmarking String_depth6_len6
time                 55.72 ms   (55.54 ms .. 55.91 ms)
                     1.000 R²   (1.000 R² .. 1.000 R²)
mean                 55.62 ms   (55.20 ms .. 55.76 ms)
std dev              463.9 μs   (60.86 μs .. 793.0 μs)

benchmarking String_depth7_len7
time                 823.6 ms   (NaN s .. 824.0 ms)
                     1.000 R²   (1.000 R² .. 1.000 R²)
mean                 823.6 ms   (823.5 ms .. 823.7 ms)
std dev              109.4 μs   (77.75 μs .. 131.9 μs)
variance introduced by outliers: 19% (moderately inflated)

benchmarking Builder_depth5_len5
time                 17.71 ms   (17.60 ms .. 17.79 ms)
                     1.000 R²   (1.000 R² .. 1.000 R²)
mean                 18.07 ms   (17.95 ms .. 18.23 ms)
std dev              332.8 μs   (237.5 μs .. 462.1 μs)

benchmarking Builder_depth6_len6
time                 55.74 ms   (55.60 ms .. 55.81 ms)
                     1.000 R²   (1.000 R² .. 1.000 R²)
mean                 55.77 ms   (55.72 ms .. 55.81 ms)
std dev              78.29 μs   (51.42 μs .. 136.5 μs)

benchmarking Builder_depth7_len7
time                 802.8 ms   (784.9 ms .. 810.5 ms)
                     1.000 R²   (1.000 R² .. 1.000 R²)
mean                 809.7 ms   (806.1 ms .. 811.6 ms)
std dev              3.501 ms   (120.7 μs .. 4.361 ms)
variance introduced by outliers: 19% (moderately inflated)
```

Reviewer 17: > @phadej wrote:
> to infer types as I annotated, and I think it's possible to make type propagation work that way with a functional dependency (when you are building Text at the end, you'll ask for Builder splice; when building Builder you'll ask for Builder splices and so on)

That would not work without `OverloadedStrings`:
```
let s1 = s"a ${b}" :: ShowS
let s2 = s"c ${d}" :: ShowS
let s3 = s"${s1}${s2}" :: String
```
That would be a type error because `s1` and `s2` must be a `String` at the end. We either allow polymorphic values inside a splice or tie it to the same type as an input value.

> I'm seeing the same performance for both implicit-builder and implicit-no-builder

I guess you should add some `{-# NOINLINE #-}` pragmas there and here to prevent full inline that would not happen in real scale projects with dynamically obtained values. You obviously can't inline `x` if you previously read it from a socket.

`tasty-bench`, `criterion` and other libraries that provide infrastructure for benchmarks avoid this problem because they have a function like `nf :: (a -> b) -> a -> ...` with `{-# NOINLINE #-}` pragma, that prevents GHC from optimising first argument of the `nf` to its input value.

      - The second ``{`` is not a valid character to start an expression
    * - ``s"a ${b -- asdf} c"``
      - The rest of the string is commented out

Multiline strings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

  let x = "hello"

  -- original string
  let str0 =
        s"""
        ${x} world
        world ${x}
        ${x} world
        """

  -- resolve multiline string
  let str1 = s"${x} world\nworld ${x}\n${x} world"

  -- resolve interpolation
  let str2 = "hello world\nworld hello\nhello world"

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

An existing program containing ``s"..."`` will break when ``-XStringInterpolation`` is enabled. While there's precedent for this (Template Haskell splices make ``$(...)`` different from ``$ (...)``), this is the first instance where whitespace matters for an alphanumeric identifier. But this is not a big deal:

#. It's unlikely for someone to be naming a function as ``s`` in the first place
#. Easily mitigatable: just add a space, which improves readability anyway
#. Prefixing string literals like ``s"..."`` is common in other languages: Python, Scala, Javascript/Typescript, etc. so it shouldn't be a big hurdle for newcomers

> When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, string interpolation can be used for any type with an ``IsString`` instance. Otherwise, it will only ever build Strings.

Reviewer 6: When `OverloadedStrings` is *disabled*, I can see that the use of a raw part of an unqualified interpolated string will force the type of the whole expression to be `String`. But what about the case where there are no raw parts, e.g. `s"${x}${y}"`? Does the compiler still ensure the whole expression is a `String`, and if so, how is this made consistent with the treatment of qualified interpolated strings?

Author: Good question. Currently, no, that would be ambiguous even if `OverloadedStrings` is disabled.

I see two solutions here:
1. Only do `fromString . interpolate` if `OverloadedStrings`, otherwise just `interpolate`
2. Always add a dummy `raw ""` to the end

I think probably the first one is better here?

Reviewer 6: Hmm, I'm not sure exactly what 1 means, given that `fromString . interpolate` is part of the definition of `interpolateString`, so we'd have to select a different `interpolateString` depending on whether `OverloadedStrings` is enabled?

The simplest solution I can see is constraining the whole inserted `interpolateString` expression to have type `String` in the `NoOverloadedStrings` case:

|  | `OverloadedStrings` | `NoOverloadedStrings` |
|--------|--------|--------|
| `s"..."` | `D.S.I.E.interpolateString ...` | `D.S.I.E.interpolateString ... :: String` |
| `M.s"..."` | `M.interpolateString ...` | `M.interpolateString ...` |

Author: Yes, that's much simpler :)

* Quasiquotes induces a dependency on Template Haskell, which a lot of people avoid out of principle. Most QuasiQuoters also add a dependency on ``haskell-src-exts`` to parse arbitrary Haskell expressions, which could technically be avoided by using something like ``ghc-meta`` (`repo <https://github.com/noughtmare/ghc-meta>`_, `GHC issue <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/20862>`_), but this isn't in wide use yet.

If Haskell had native string interpolation, it would have the benefit and safety of the current third-party quasiquotes without the need for Template Haskell, and be able to take advantage of features like `multiline strings <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/569>`_.
::

  error s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

  let textExample = s"${name1} (age: ${age1}) encountered ${name2} (age: ${age2})"

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

> This proposal introduces the ``-XStringInterpolation`` extension, with support for ``-XOverloadedStrings`` and ``-XQualifiedStrings`` (`proposal <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/698>`_).

Reviewer 3: Wrong proposal link. #723 is the proposal I believe

High-level Overview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``-XStringInterpolation`` enables the following syntax:

::

>   s"a ${x + 1} b"

Reviewer 10: I would like to know how we go from `s` to `interpolateString` in the desugaring. It seems a bit magical, particularly with `QualifiedStrings`. It might be good to give this syntax one last solid thought, because it currently looks like we have a normal qualified binding (`SomeModule.s`) affecting the string literal immediately after in a way that looks like it could almost be normal function application.

Maybe `SomeModule."a ${x + 1} b"`, for symmetry with `QualifiedDo`? Although that could still be parsed as a function composition of a data constructor and a string literal, it looks "weirder" to me in a way that `SomeModule.s` doesn't.

Reviewer 15: I also think that the modifier `s"..."` looks like a bad design.
Maybe it is better to use symbol instead. Like `$"..."` (dollar sign looks like "S" letter).

Author: @endgame it's whitespace sensitive, in the same way `f $ a` and `f $a` are different with template haskell enabled. So `s"..."` is a native interpolated string and `M.s"..."` is a qualified interpolated string. The lexer is already able to recognize whitespace-sensitive constructs, so it can output an "interpolated string start" token that's handled by the parser.

`M."..."` is already qualified strings syntax, and there ought to be a way to distinguish between qualified strings and qualified interpolated strings.

@VitWW We've already discussed this before, and this is listed in Alternatives. Dollar is too similar to TH and I'd like to avoid it. You keep claiming "the modifier looks like bad design" without any explanation. Why is it bad design? Scala does it this way. Python uses `f"..."`.

  -- Desugars to:
  Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.interpolateString $ \convert raw append empty ->
             raw "a "
    `append` convert (x + 1)
    `append` raw " b"
    `append` empty

The string literals are affected by ``-XOverloadedStrings`` as usual, if enabled. ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`` will be initially provided by ``ghc-experimental``, containing the following:

::

>   interpolateString f = mconcat $ f (fromString . interpolate) id (:) []

Reviewer 3: Type please 😬. Edit: Aha, it is provided in 2.4. I understand you want to hide the type here, but please leave a forward reference in a comment.

  class Interpolate a where
    {-# MINIMAL interpolate | interpolateS #-}

    interpolate :: a -> String
    interpolate x = interpolateS x ""

    interpolateS :: a -> ShowS
    interpolateS x s = interpolate x <> s

When ``-XQualifiedStrings`` is enabled, you may qualify string interpolation as well:

::

  Text.s"hello world"

  -- Desugars to:
  Text.interpolateString $ \_ raw _ _ -> raw "hello world"

> 

Reviewer 3: So when both `-XQualifiedStrings` and `-XStringInterpolation` are active, we get a different desugaring? I think it would be good to define what a "good qualified implementation" is, then: One in which `fromString s = interpolateString $ \_ raw _ _ => raw s`.

Reviewer 3: Maybe it would be better to keep the regular desugaring to `fromString` for qualified string literals without interpolations, though. Then it's not a potentially breaking change to activate `-XStringInterpolation`. On the other hand, it's already a breaking change because it steals syntax. Hmm. Not sure how to decide here. I wonder if there is precedent?

Reviewer 3: I think I have a better suggestion below that builds on rewrite rules.

Author: No different desugaring. OverloadedStrings/QualifiedStrings only affects `"..."`/`M."..."`. StringInterpolation enables `s"..."`/`M.s"..."`.

The only distinction is if OverloadedStrings and StringInterpolation are both enabled, the string literal passed to `raw` is an overloaded string literal.

Reviewer 3: Right, I think my main objection was actually this: I can see that `"foo"` and `s"foo"` should yield the same string. But we lose this connection when rebinding/using `-XQualifiedStrings`; `M."foo"` need not be in any way related to `M.s"foo"`. I don't have an idea how to fix this. And we may have `Sql.s"..."` but not `Sql."..."`, so it's not like this connection is always defined anyway.

I'll just resolve this discussion; not much to act on here.

Author: That's a good point. `M.s"foo"` and `M."foo"` really ought to be the same, but nothing enforces this. **Is this a feature or a bug?** On one hand, we could treat it the same as typeclass laws: you ought to to match user expectations, but we should keep the interface general and flexible. On the other hand, we could enforce it by changing the desugaring to:

```hs
-- M.s"a${x}b"
M.interpolateString $ \convert append empty ->
           M.fromString "a"
  `append` convert x
  `append` M.fromString "b"
  `append` empty
```

That is, replace `raw` with `M.fromString`, which makes the interface less flexible but more predictable. Do you have any thoughts here?

Author: Actually, I think we should keep it as `raw`. Even if we reused `M.fromString`, there's nothing stopping `M.fromString s `append` empty` from being different than `M.fromString s`.

  SQL.s"select * from users where name = ${Text.toUpper name} and age = ${age}"

  -- Desugars to:
  SQL.interpolateString $ \convert raw append empty ->
             raw "select * from users where name = "
    `append` convert (Text.toUpper name)
    `append` raw " and age = "
    `append` convert age
    `append` empty

> It is highly recommended that any type with an ``IsString`` instance provide the below definition for use with ``-XQualifiedStrings``. This allows using locally-scoped string interpolation for non-String types without enabling it globally with ``-XOverloadedStrings``.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if a better implementation would be this:

1. There is only a single implementation of `interpolateString`, the one in the experimental module.
2. With `-XQualifiedStrings`, we get from `T."a ${b} c"` something like `T.fromString $ Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.interpolateString ...`, that is, the `String`-specific interpolation naïvely wrapped in `T.fromString`. This is the natural, compositional desugaring, I believe.
3. If performance is an issue for Text and SQL libraries, they provide an optimized implementation `interpolateText` that replaces every use of `String` with `Text`. Then they provide a rewrite rule `T.fromString (interpolateString f) = interpolateText (\c r a e -> f (... c ..) (...r...) (...a...) (...e...)`. As you can see, this rewrite rule is so general that it will always trigger, especially if we mark `interpolateString` as `INLINE[1]` or something.

Performance problem solved and no complicated interactions with qualified strings.

Author: It's not solely a matter of performance. Like QualifiedDo, I should be able to implement interpolateString however I want, as long as the specific use-case passes typechecking. SQL isn't just a matter of performance, it's being able to replace interpolated values with parameters.

I also don't want to rely on rewrite rules, which is too unreliable, as others have also mentioned. There's also no precedent with QualifiedStrings or QualifiedDo

Reviewer 18: My impression is that rewrite rules are already required under this proposal if we want to optimise for performance?

The `Interpolate` class hard-codes the output type `String`, so even if the `text` package implements interpolations that goes through `Data.Text.Lazy.Builder.Builder`, integers would still be interpolated first to `String`s, instead of directly to `Builder`s by `Data.Text.Lazy.Builder.Int.decimal`. I imagine that every custom type that implements `Interpolate` will need to implement a similar rewrite rule for `text`, and the same would apply to `bytestring` (and even `prettyprinter` etc.).

So it seems the `m * n` problem is not solved by hard-coding `String`s in `Interpolate`. I'd actually argue that the problem worsens, because instead of reliably specialising the behaviour by providing dedicated instances, we depend solely on the rewrite rules firing and we are limited to what rewrite rules can express.

I don't like the idea that users of string interpolations suffer from worse performance, and the only way to optimise is to desugar the interpolation manually and swap in specialised interpolators. I'd rather a type not support interpolation to `Text.Builder` at all if it does not optimise for it. At least I could fix the problem easily with orphan instances, which I'd prefer compared to rewrite rules and inline stages.

Author: The `text` example in the proposal does not currently use rewrite rules. If you're using `StringInterpolation` + `OverloadedStrings`, then you're using the default `Interpolate` class with `fromString`. Theoretically, I guess you could add rewrite rules for `fromString (interpolate x) :: Int -> Text`, but I'm not sure how effective that would be.

The idea here is the native string interpolation behavior with `Interpolate` works and has okay performance, but if performance is your goal, you should not be doing this.

`text` should instead provide a `Data.Text.Builder.interpolateString` with their own `Data.Text.Builder.Interpolate` type class and users should do
```hs
import Data.Text.Builder qualified as TB

TB.s"Age: ${age}"

instance TB.Interpolate MyType where
  interpolate = _
```
Yes, it's `M*N` instances, but there isn't a way around that if you want optimized routes between all M value types an N string types. Even with rewrite rules, you'd still be writing `M*N` rewrite rules, and it's less reliable that type class instance resolution

Reviewer 18: Ah, I see what I am missing. The `Interpolate` class is also replaced with the specialised version when the interpolation is qualified. Then it makes sense to me. Perhaps this fact can be clarified somewhere in the proposal?

Author: It's not necessarily that the Interpolate class is replaced, it's that the custom `interpolateString` function can be implemented however you want. You could not have an `Interpolate` class at all if you want to require only interpolating Ints! So it's merely that the custom interpolator has total control over the signature.

Reviewer 18: Right. Now I totally get it. Really sorry for being dumb on this. 😅

Reviewer 3: The SQL use case is convincing.

::

  interpolateString :: String -> MyString
  interpolateString = Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.interpolateString

Lexical Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.2 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-17700010.2>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

Add ``istring*`` patterns to ``lexeme`` (not ``literal``, because they're not literals):

.. code-block:: abnf

  lexeme  → qvarid | qconid | qvarsym | qconsym
          | literal | special | reservedop | reservedid
          | istringBegin
          | istringRaw
          | istringExprOpen
          | istringExprClose
          | istringEnd
          | istringMultilineBegin
          | istringMultilineRawStartLine
          | istringMultilineRawMidLine
          | istringMultilineEnd
          | istringQualifiedBegin
          | istringQualifiedMultilineBegin

  istringBegin → 's"' | modid . 's"'
  istringRaw → {graphic⟨'\' | '"' | '${'⟩ | space | escape | gap}
  istringExprOpen → '${'

>   istringExprClose → '}'

Reviewer 3: I think you should acknowledge somwhere here that you support syntax such as `s"${'}'}"` and `s"a ${User{a = 1}} b"`, so you don't interpret *every* occurrence of `}` as `istringExprClose`. IIRC there is precedent for recognizing nested structures in the lexer, perhaps for strings?

Author: It's in the Examples section (3.1); I'll add a note here

  instance Interpolate a => Interpolate (Maybe a) where
    interpolateS Nothing = showString "Nothing"
    interpolateS (Just a) = showString "Just (" . interpolateS a . showChar ')'

Expansion
~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.interpolateString $ \convert raw append empty ->
             raw "foo "
    `append` convert (f a b)
    `append` raw " bar "
    `append` convert (g x)
    `append` raw " baz "
    `append` convert name
    `append` empty

The string literals there will be handled by ``-XOverloadedStrings`` as usual, if enabled, although it's recommended to use ``-XQualifiedStrings`` instead, for more granular overloading.

Template Haskell
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Template Haskell will add the following definitions:

::

  data Exp
    = ...
    | InterStringE (Maybe ModuleName) [InterStringPart]

  data InterStringPart
    = InterStringRaw String
    | InterStringExp Exp

We won't use ``Either`` as it doesn't seem like ``Either`` is used in any other TH types.

> 

Reviewer 3: In #742 you are arguing that qualified strings don't need a TH representation after all. Doesn't this argument transfer to interpolated strings?

Context-Free Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.5 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-18000010.5>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

.. code-block:: abnf

  aexp → qvar
       | ...
       | istring
       | istringMultiline

  istring →
    istringBegin
      {istringRaw | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose}
      istringEnd

  istringMultiline →
    istringMultilineBegin
      {istringMultilineRawStartLine | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose istringMultilineRawMidLine}
      istringMultilineEnd

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Experimental``. After the API has stablized, these might eventually live in ``base`` under ``Data.String``, alongside ``IsString``.

::

  {----- Implementation of s"..." -----}

  interpolateRaw :: IsString s => String -> s
  interpolateRaw = fromString

  interpolateValue :: (Interpolate a, IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s
  interpolateValue = interpolate

  interpolateAppend :: Monoid s => s -> s -> s

>   interpolateAppend = mappend

Reviewer: Noticed this was missing an infix statement. It might be good to mention in the proposal explicitly that the use of infix interpolateAppend lets you customise the associativity. Not sure what the precedence should be.

Author: Oh interesting. The proposal currently hardcodes it as right-associative, but customizing the associativity for qualified string interpolations does seem compelling. `<>` is `infixr 6`, so I'll go ahead and do that

Reviewer: I thought it said it desugared to the infix notation but perhaps that was just for clarity? I'm not sure how big of a use case left association is, I think I just saw an example using infix and thought that was a neat way of achieving it. Would it be difficult to implement that in GHC? Since the parser has already ran, but I think I've heard GHC re-associates operations later on in order to implement custom operators.

Author: The infix notation was just for clarity, but the "Expansion" section explicitly says "right-associated". But it is possible in GHC, so I can add it

  interpolateEmpty :: Monoid s => s
  interpolateEmpty = mempty

  interpolateFinalize :: s -> s
  interpolateFinalize = id

  {----- Interpolation of values -----}

  class Interpolate a where
    {-# MINIMAL interpolate | interpolatePrec -#}

    interpolate :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s
    interpolate = interpolatePrec 0

    interpolatePrec :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => Int -> a -> s

>     interpolatePrec _ = interpolate

Reviewer 18: I believe this still does not support interpolating a `Builder` for free (as I understand what @maralorn was concerned about). Specifically, if we have `a :: T.Builder`, do we support `T.s"${a} ..."`? If we support it using this `Interpolate` class, then the best we could have is the following instance:
```haskell
instance Interpolate T.Builder where
  interpolate = fromString . show
```
This seems to completely defeat the purpose of a text builder.

In general, I think the problem can be phrased like this: can we save an intermediate interpolation result without finalising it, and use it later in another interpolation? This would involve two different capaibilities: to opt out of `finalise`, and to interpolate `Builder`s for free.

**Edit:** of course, the "without finalisation" part is already supported with `finalise = id`. I brought it up purely because finalisation is a separate step from interpolation in my mental model.

Reviewer 18: Another thought: if `Builder`s can be interpolated for free, then we do not actually need to rely on `REWRITE` rules to optimise for performance. Instead of `s"${n}"`, one could have written `s"${TL.decimal n}"` if they absolutely need to.

Author: Ah yes, you're right; this doesn't completely solve @maralorn's concern. Note: your implementation isn't accurate, the implementation would actually be
```hs
instance Interpolate TL.Builder where
  interpolate = fromString . TL.unpack . TL.toLazyText
```
If rewrite rules fire, it should hopefully be `id`. But even if they don't, this is no worse than the previous state of `interpolate :: a -> String`.

Going back to my response to @maralorn, I don't think it's possible to solve this 100% without making `Interpolate` a multi-param type class, which would degrade the overall experience. I think the current proposal gets us 90% there, and if someone really wants to nest Builders within string interpolations, they'd have to use a dedicated `Builder.s"..."` interpolator using its own `interpolate :: a -> Builder` class.

However, I think at this point, we're discussing theoretical purity beyond practical scenarios. You'd only encounter this if you're in a performance sensitive context AND you're nesting string interpolations. IMO this is a fraction of a fraction of use-cases. If you're in such a performance sensitive context, I'd argue (as I've said before) you wouldn't be using string interpolation in the first place, let alone nesting them inside each other

Reviewer 18: I think I get your point. I guess my concern was more from a purist's point of view: if you use string interpolation correctly, the resulting code should be no worse than what you could have written manually. That said, if this is deemed impossible, then the current proposal does cover the most common use cases.

I am actually wondering what the maintainers of `text` think about this proposal. After this rolls out, would they reuse the `Interpolate` class, or would they introduce their own for the best performance?

Author: I was curious about the actual runtimes of converting an Int to Builder via String vs directly:
https://gist.github.com/brandonchinn178/e65f52c7353983bfd243ce4c51789dd0

I guess for large values, it does become dramatically different: 2x for six digits, 3.5x for `maxBound`. However, if you're only interpolating six digit numbers, it's only a difference of 20ns. Even if interpolating 100 six-digit numbers means a 2ms slowdown, who's interpolating 100 six-digit numbers? IMO if you're building a string with that large of a payload, you're probably not concerned with a 2ms performance difference.

Author: > if you use string interpolation correctly, the resulting code should be no worse than what you could have written manually.

I'd argue that we've achieved that. How many people who are writing Builder code today would rewrite it with string interpolation? I don't think many would, but someone else who knows better should speak up.

> I am actually wondering what the maintainers of `text` think about this proposal. After this rolls out, would they reuse the `Interpolate` class, or would they introduce their own for the best performance?

Yeah, that's a good question. @Bodigrim @TeofilC ? Would also be nice to get your thoughts in https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/416

Reviewer 18: > How many people who are writing Builder code today would rewrite it with string interpolation?

Actually, this is exactly my plan, and that is the main reason why I am tracking this proposal closely. 😄

I have a custom `QuasiQuotes`-based interpolation implementation that targets `String`, `T.Builder`, strict and lazy `Text`, and `Doc` from `prettyprinter`. I am really looking forward to using the native string interpolation in my applications.

Author: Fair enough! 😁 Do you have a link? I'm curious.

Author: Oh! If you really care about performance, and don't mind explicitly interpolating, you could always do

```hs
module Plain where

interpolateRaw :: IsString s => String -> s
interpolateRaw = fromString

interpolateValue :: s -> s
interpolateValue = id

interpolateAppend :: Monoid s => s -> s -> s
interpolateAppend = mappend

interpolateEmpty :: Monoid s => s
interpolateEmpty = mempty

interpolateFinalize :: s -> s
interpolateFinalize = id
```
```hs
let name = Plain.s"name: ${TL.fromText name}"
    age = Plain.s"age: ${TL.decimal age}"
 in Plain.s"Person: ${name} ${age}" :: TL.Builder
```

You'd still have to convert manually, as you would in your manual Builder code today, but you can still get the ergonomics of string interpolation for the appends!

Perhaps I could add it to the proposal, maybe even provide a bunch of useful interpolators out of the box:
| Module | Details |
|---|---|
|`Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental` | Defines the `Interpolate` class and instances |
| `Data.String.Interpolate.Default.Experimental` | Defines the `interpolate*` functions for any IsString/Monoid using `Interpolate` (the default `s"..."`) |
| `Data.String.Interpolate.Explicit.Experimental` | Same as default except `interpolateValue = id` |
| `Data.String.Interpolate.String.Experimental` | Provide an interpolator that only builds String, but uses ShowS for better performance |
| `Data.String.Interpolate.ShowS.Experimental` | Provide an interpolator that could be used to implement `showsPrec`; see proposal |
| `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental` | Re-exports class and default |
| `Data.String.Experimental` | Re-exports just the class |

Reviewer: I like the single parameter type class but I'm confused as to why `Builder` was dropped.
Doesn't this mean dropping ShowS and text builder, or having to interpolate as them?

I think it was better as
```Haskell
class (IsString (Builder s), Monoid (Builder s)) => IsInterpolatedString s where
  -- replaces Interpolate return constraint/type, IsInterpolated s => Int -> a -> Builder s

  type Builder s = r | r -> s -- was this the right syntax?

  finalise :: Builder s -> s

interpolateFinalize :: IsInterpolatedString s => Builder s -> s
interpolateFinalize = finalize
```

You could still have a text builder instance, you'd just have to newtype it for the instance monoid (which could maybe be done generically?).

Also may be worth trying these things out to see if the rewrite rules do fire as desired.

Reviewer 18: > Do you have a link?

I uploaded my implementation to a gist just now: https://gist.github.com/ruifengx/8c08cbba6ba8a4b661d04a47f68cc2e4

> Perhaps I could add it to the proposal, maybe even provide a bunch of useful interpolators out of the box

I like this idea, especially the `Explicit` variant. This seems to fit everyone's need, except perhaps a bit of verbosity.

---

As a side note, I did not realise that interpolation for `String` results does not go through `ShowS` under the current proposal. Since the default string interpolation would still produce a monomorphic `String` result, I think it is reasonable to create a newtype-wrapper for `ShowS`, implement `IsString`, `Semigroup`, and `Monoid` for that, and specify that the default string interpolation uses this type internally.

Reviewer 19: > I am actually wondering what the maintainers of `text` think about this proposal. After this rolls out, would they reuse the `Interpolate` class, or would they introduce their own for the best performance?

A non-answer is that `text` is unlikely to do anything any time soon, until at least `class Interpolate` makes its way into `base` for sufficiently many releases. I'd hope for third-party packages to fill the gap and act as trailblazers.
 
> I guess for large values, it does become dramatically different: 2x for six digits, 3.5x for maxBound. However, if you're only interpolating six digit numbers, it's only a difference of 20ns. Even if interpolating 100 six-digit numbers means a 2ms slowdown, who's interpolating 100 six-digit numbers? 

`Data.Text.Lazy.Builder` is rather slow, packages like [`text-builder-linear`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/text-builder-linear) easily get 3x faster for interpolation of integers. Anecdotally, I saw applications where rendering large quantities of short numbers was a bottleneck.

Reviewer 20: Thank you @brandonchinn178 for indulging my concern. However I might be misunderstanding things, but I am not very excited about changing `class Interpolate` to use `IsString`.

* It is my impression that every implementation of `interpolate` will boil down to calling `fromString` at some point (feels like one of those "theorems for free" thingies) so every value will still get threaded through `String` for every interpolation.
* I don’t like the idea of having a less clean looking API just so that a rewrite rule might fire. I actually agree with you: When performance is really critical people will find other ways. This is actually something that makes me really enthusiastic about this proposal with QualifiedStrings it is really flexible and people will be able to do all kinds of cool stuff with it.
* I think there are concerns in the community about some `IsString` instances being harmful. (e.g. for `ByteString`) so coupling it closer to this proposal might make it less popular.

The only advantage of the approach seems to be that implementations of `interpolate` can use the `Monoid` of `Builder` instead of `String` but that seems kinda orthogonal to my concern that every `Builder` will roundtrip through `String`.

Reviewer 21: > who's interpolating 100 six-digit numbers?

API endpoint for batch SQL update comes to mind immediately. consider also: you are describing the canonical representation of epoch timestamps.

Author: * @Bodigrim Thanks! Makes sense
* @akhra Thanks! That's a good point.
* @maralorn - Yes, I misspoke earlier; `Builder` would still roundtrip to `String`, so yes, the changes here are orthogonal to your original comment.
    * Yes, for a lot of instances (e.g. Int), the new approach has _no difference_ to the previous approach of going via String
    * The difference is that there will be many more composite types (e.g. user types with Int/String fields) that only require raw strings + Monoid, so those types no longer roundtrip to String. So your comment about "every implementation will boil down to calling `fromString`" is not true (which I originally thought too, but was convinced otherwise)
        * I just updated the proposal with an example under "Composite types"
    * So it's not just an attempt to get rewrite rules to fire (although it's _possible_ now, unlike before), it's a generalization that's exactly equivalent to the old `-> String` for some types, but strictly better for others
    * `IsString` being harmful is orthogonal to this design point. The previous approach still used `IsString`; it was just applied after `interpolate` instead of inside it
* @ruifengx RE: your side note, your suggestion won't work as-is, because the default `interpolateFinalize` is `id`, so the default interpolation has no separation between "the type to append as" vs "the return type". But see my reply to @Jashweii below
* @Jashweii Yes, you're right! The functional dependency actually isn't needed here, since the inference direction only needs to be `s -> Builder s`. The functional dependency was needed in the case where everything was in one class, but not if finalize is its own class. I've updated the proposal

Reviewer: I've been thinking about the possibility of extending the `StringInterpolator` class (and making `Interpolate` require it) with something like this for primitives, so re-write rules are less of a problem (especially in a recursive data structure):
```Haskell
class StringInterpolator s where
  ...

  -- defaults to fromString via a String

  -- A) works on a growable array
  writeBuilder :: StringWriter -> InterpolatorBuilder s

  -- B) works on a fixed size array
  --    .. but you can spot it finished early, and continue the rest on a new InterpolatorBuilder s, which you concatenate
  writeBuilder :: StringWriter -> (InterpolatorBuilder s, Int)

-- this itself can be isstring, monoid (might need to take a position from previous writes?), etc (even interpolable)
data StringWriter = StringWriter
  { min_capacity :: !Int
  , write        :: forall s. Int /* actual capacity >= min_capacity */ 
                    -> /* writable ST s array or pointer of char or byte */
                    -> ST s Int /* size used */
  -- or a growable version GrowableByteArray s -> ST s (GrowableByteArray s)
  -- conceptually linear in the given array, so Text could freeze it (if possible)
  }
```

I think this could be gotten to work well for `text` but maybe not `bytestring` or anything where the memory representation might differ (or at least, they require 1 additional allocation & transcoding - could be ok for a small buffer for primitives?).

I suppose for most primitives (fixed sized integers, floats, ...) regrowing isn't a problem so maybe it could be even simpler.

Author: First of all, that definition won't work without `AllowAmbiguousTypes` because `InterpolatorBuilder s` doesn't uniquely identify `s` without the functional dependency.

But I still don't understand; the moment you specify a concrete writer type, you still force primitive interpolations to go to `s` via a hardcoded type, whether it's `String` or `StringWriter`. I don't see how it meaningfully helps the `Int -> Builder` conversion

Reviewer: If it's stored as a contiguous array of `Char` (I think `text` might be?) then it can allocate an array, run the write function, then just freeze that array as the builder or string value (depends on the builder - I haven't looked at this). If it's not, at least you're converting a contiguous char array to your representation type (which is also probably the most efficient thing to write to since it's just a pointer increment and store).

Probably something like this would be better though.
```Haskell
data StringWriter = StringWriter
  { size :: !Int
  , write :: forall s. Addr# -> ST s ()
  }
```

As for ambiguous types, it would mostly be used to implement it for primitives, so users wouldn't have to worry (as they should use the primitive directly if they aren't implementing a new one) - it could use type applications, signatures, proxies, forall -> etc under the hood (whatever the clc want).

Edit: text is an array, text-builder-linear are linear (i.e. consuming/mutating) transformations on arrays, lazy text builder is something like the growable concept I was suggesting (but this can be much simpler since it's primarily for primitives and anything more complex can do this multiple times). Though the advantage of the growable (and potentially resumable) version is that you could do it in easily converted packets or onto a fixed buffer separate from your actual buffer (in the case of differently encoded things, or if many individual small allocations are bad). Perhaps this would be inefficient for String?

Reviewer: If I wasn't clear, this isn't an alternative to anything currently in the proposal (other than Interpolate taking the full interpolated string class constraint instead) it was just an extra defaulted/optional method for more efficiently writing contiguous Chars instead of hoping for re-write rules to fire.

For context there was a comment I didn't end up posting where I was thinking about the downsides of primitive write functions (i.e. either you need many of them and it still isn't enough, or pay the cost of boxing as Rational or Double etc and you still can't do exotic new primitives) and I was trying to think of something generically useful.

I'm not sure this is necessarily the best interface for the concept [e.g. as mentioned the simpler version leads to lots of little allocations] but I think the idea is attractive, because at the very least it's efficient for most algorithms that translate things to strings to write out to an unboxed array - the question is just what the specific string type has to do with that e.g. transcoding or changing the representation.

Author: Oh! Actually, thought of a new idea that I think solves the primitive problem. Not at my laptop now, so just a quick sketch:

Right now, String is the only blessed interpolation type; everything must interpolate via String (or join with Monoid). If we use a finally tagless API, we could expand it to a larger set of blessed interpolation types. It still wouldnt be completely open ended, but it's better than blessing just one type.

```hs
class (InterpolatorBuilder (InterpolatorBuilderFor s)) => Interpolator s where
  type InterpolatorBuilderFor s
  buildInterpolator :: InterpolatorBuilderFor s -> s

class (Monoid b, Interpolator b) => InterpolatorBuilder b where
  interpolateString :: String -> b
  default interpolateString :: IsString b => String -> b
  interpolateString = fromString

  interpolateChar :: Char -> b
  default interpolateChar :: IsString b => Char -> b
  interpolateChar c = fromString [c]

  interpolateInt :: Int -> b
  default interpolateInt :: IsString b => Int -> b
  interpolateInt = fromString . show

class Interpolate a where
  interpolate :: InterpolatorBuilder b => a -> b
  interpolatePrec :: InterpolatorBuilder b => Int -> a -> b
```

Reviewer: Having a method per primitive is part of what I was thinking about in the comment I never made:

1. There are already many primitives. Think of all the different sized Word and Int types.
   Even if you pick the biggest ones (e.g. Int, Word, Rational, Double) you're adding a cost (faster to convert smaller types) and what if GHC2030 adds Int128? Now it's a breaking change
2. There are different ways of writing primitives, e.g. in binary (in which case there's a fixed size and picking the biggest doesn't work well)
   All the different specifiers you might use in C for example
3. Users might have their own custom "primitives" (or at least ways of writing them).

This is why I've been thinking of something generic like the char writer idea, where instead you supply the method of writing characters and it converts it to its own representation. I think it's all the same in terms of "what methods can we add to the builder to optimise primitives" and if it's all set up (i.e. interpolate references the full class) then it's backwards compatible to add new ones.

Author: I don't understand the breaking change aspect. All the methods have defaults using fromString, so adding new primitives is not a breaking change

The issue of a type having multiple representations is already an issue today. This doesnt change that, it just allows a builder to provide more conversion options than just String

Reviewer: I mean if everything currently goes via 64 bit ints because you don't want a separate version for Int8, Int16, Int32, Int64 (nevermind words) and you add Int128, now everything either no longer goes through it (new method) or you change the type (which is a breaking change). This is why I think something for writing to a pointer makes more sense, you can make as many primitives as you want efficiently (even in C). Really I think the only downside is if there's a different encoding you need to transcode it too.

Author: I think there's lots of options here, so I'm not worried about it. This idea is strictly better than the current proposal because it simply allows more types; if GHC adds Int128, it would be unblessed with the current proposal, and it would still be unblessed with this new idea.

But some ideas:
* Implement Int128 in terms of Int64 (encode top half, encode bottom half, mappend)
* Add `interpolateInt128`, change Int8..64 to use that, deprecate `interpolateInt` for any other writers calling it directly (as opposed to calling interpolate on Int)

Reviewer: I don't think it's a problem for the proposal and can be a CLC concern later down the line but I still think the method taking a size and a write-into-array procedure to produce a builder would be a lot more general than any specific primitive methods.

Author: I'm intrigued, but can't seem to wrap my head around it. Could you provide a working prototype?

Reviewer: Here's a simplified example using the fixed writer. Both the primitives are simplified but also the example since it should be producing builders (should be possible, only question is if their builders also have a writing interface in which case is this compatible in a very nice way). In an extreme case you could also interpolate into that fixed size writer type if you have a case where it's more performant. I've not included any classes here but the new method would have definitions toText and toString in this file (except it would produce the builders). Also the actual definition of FixedSizeWriter is likely to be in another more internal module - as you can see it depends on writes to a memory address [but the monoid/string/interpolation operations would be safe].

https://godbolt.org/z/Kz6W4Med6
Edit: bits8 is wrong. Remove j=2^i and just use i. (I originally used &)

Again something like this would 100% need discussing with the `text` maintainers and co. But it should also be a library problem because it's a defaulted extra method to what is proposed here.

Reviewer: The actual interface would look like this:
```Haskell
-- exposed in the same module
data Writer -- name tbd
instance Semigroup Writer
instance Monoid Writer
instance IsString Writer
-- can interpolate as a writer (it is its own builder, presumably like other builders)
instance Interpolator Writer where
  type InterpolatorBuilderFor Writer = Writer
  buildInterpolator = id
instance InterpolatorBuilder Writer where
  interpolateWriter = id
-- can embed a writer into an interpolation
instance Interpolate Writer where
  interpolate = interpolateWriter

-- new optional method
class … => InterpolatorBuilder b where
  interpolateWriter :: Writer -> b
  -- default: interpolate it as a string, then fromString
  -- optimal (if using contiguous utf-8): allocate and use write method then freeze
  -- slightly less optimal (other encodings): above then transcode (possibly in-place)

-- not sure on these, they are safe, but there might be many of them
-- the user can define more if they want, and can even create arbitrary new Writers
-- using interpolation syntax on smaller writers [which might be a good implementation
-- for a default Interpolate instance, except for recursive cases... might be a problem for
-- an infinite field]
writerFloat :: RealFloat a => a -> Writer
writerIntegral :: Integral a => a -> Writer
writerIntegralSigned :: Integral a => a -> Writer
writerIntegralHex :: Integral a => a -> Writer
writerBinary :: Bits a => a -> Writer
writerSignedIntegral :: Integral a => a -> Writer
-- default instance for (Interpolate <primitive>) etc would use [\x -> interpolateWriter (writer<...> x)]

-- another internal but exposed module
-- implementors of the interpolated string type need the definition if they
-- don't want to go via string
data Writer = Writer { … }
```

I think a downside of this is it is basically a blessed builder (write to [optionally, chunks of] contiguous chars) that gets lifted into a type specific builder. It makes me wonder if there could be a one size fits most - but not the (unchunked) fixed size writer because it doesn't work in infinite cases. (You can probably just have the write field return a Maybe Writer for "more work tbd" in which case size is an underestimate and implementations may need to re-allocate.) Obviously this isn't great for String, but it's not terrible either, and String is not the one people are concerned with the performance of.

I think it's worth consulting maintainers on their opinions on primitives for `InterpolatorBuilder` or if there's a common ground builder. By the way, another interpolation I thought of was file paths (as is very common in bash) and here you might see wide chars become relevant on windows.

## ----- Edit (to reduce e-mails) -----

I looked more into the writer concept I was suggesting and found comparable internal interfaces used for primitives in `text`, `text-builder-linear` and `bytestring`.

Here is something in Text that could be used to turn that Writer concept into a lazy text builder: https://hackage-content.haskell.org/package/text-2.1.4/docs/Data-Text-Internal-Builder.html#v:writeN
(Not sure it has a way of saying less than the requested capacity was used, but I think they could add that without any difficulty.)
The int to builder primitives in text are implemented using something like this (but realfloat are not): https://hackage-content.haskell.org/package/text-2.1.4/docs/src/Data.Text.Lazy.Builder.Int.html

Text builder linear has this: https://hackage-content.haskell.org/package/text-builder-linear-0.1.3/docs/Data-Text-Builder-Linear-Core.html#g:3
In fact I didn't realise before but it already defines a Builder (Buffer %1 -> Buffer) monoid, so it should work with the unqualified version as currently proposed.
I haven't looked further into it but text-builder-linear's primitives seem like they're using a writing interface too: https://hackage-content.haskell.org/package/text-builder-linear-0.1.3/docs/src/Data.Text.Builder.Linear.Double.html

Also bytestring has its own module of primitives - you can see there are many of them.
https://hackage-content.haskell.org/package/bytestring-0.12.2.0/docs/Data-ByteString-Builder-Prim.html
If you look at its definition of FixedPrim or BoundedPrim they are virtually the same as the Writer I've suggested.
But I would add the caveat that I don't know if this is UTF-8 or pure binary data, and the current assumption with the Interpolate class is that it's the same as via fromString.
Bytestring also has the put monad https://hackage-content.haskell.org/package/bytestring-0.12.2.0/docs/Data-ByteString-Builder-Internal.html#t:Put.

So I think the writer is a solid abstraction, the only downside is that everything must match `fromString . interpolate` i.e. `Interpolate Int` has to be the result of processing the UTF-8 decimal representation of `Int` in the same way it would process raw UTF-8 characters (no special casing, it can't e.g. embed ints as binary directly).

Author: Yes, thank you! Let's push the rest of the conversation into the CLC thread.

Author: @Jashweii FYI I had AI write up a quick benchmark. Seems like `ShowS -> String -> Text` is on par with `Text.Builder -> Text`

https://gist.github.com/brandonchinn178/ded11b09b6ca36a5f319203e6e95c3bc#file-results

Reviewer 5: Just want to comment that the AI generated benchmark is bogus. You should never do `nf (const foo) ()` as a benchmark, because that will only evaluate `foo` once and afterwards the result is shared between each benchmark run, so it will only measure how long it takes to traverse `foo` after it is already fully evaluated. The benchmark should always depend on the argument in a way that GHC cannot optimize away.

Author: Yeah I realized that 🤦 Updated: https://gist.github.com/brandonchinn178/ded11b09b6ca36a5f319203e6e95c3bc

Sniff test seems better; `ShowS -> String -> Text` is now slower than `ShowS -> String` as expected. Surprisingly, `ShowS -> String -> Text` is faster than `Text.Builder -> Text`?

Reviewer 5: For some reason Text.Builder is just not a very good implementation. If you use @Bodigrim's `text-builder-linear` (without using the linear features at all) you can go much faster:

```haskell
buildTextBuilderLinear :: Int -> T.Text
{-# OPAQUE buildTextBuilderLinear #-}
buildTextBuilderLinear n = BL.runBuilder $
       "user:"
    <> BL.fromDec @Int 42
    <> " score="
    <> BL.fromDec n
    <> " tag="
    <> "haskell"
    <> " ratio="
    <> BL.fromDec @Int 314
```

```

All
  ShowS -> String:             OK
    117  ns ± 6.0 ns
  Addr# -> String:             OK
    447  ns ±  38 ns
  Addr# -> Text:               OK
    116  ns ± 6.8 ns
  Text.Builder -> Text:        OK
    302  ns ±  22 ns
  Text.Builder.Linear -> Text: OK
    80.5 ns ± 7.5 ns
  ShowS -> String -> Text:     OK
    191  ns ±  13 ns
```

Reviewer 5: (I'm also using `tasty-bench` instead of `criterion` because it has much less dependencies and hence builds much faster from scratch.)

Reviewer 19: I don't think `ShowS -> String` is a particularly good benchmark: you end up allocating most of `Char` only once and benchmark primarily `(:)` and division (!). 

Sorry for not following the entire discussion, what is this supposed to illustrate anyway?

Reviewer: > Sorry for not following the entire discussion, what is this supposed to illustrate anyway?

Basically how the different interpolate classes would perform and how they compare to qualified or specific existing alternatives. For example the latest changes to the proposal make the unqualified/wired-in version interpolate via `ShowS` to `String` before being passed to `fromString @s`, instead of `InterpolatorBuilder s`, for simplicity. Some of the `Addr#` stuff I believe is related to a suggestion I had to have an alternative to `fromString` that takes a contiguous UTF8-writer (e.g. for primitives). Personally I'm concerned it's not going to reflect what happens when these are instances with a generic result type in another module or package.

Reviewer 19: My experience is that producing `String` and hoping for `fromString` to fuse or trigger a rewrite rule is not a reliable approach performance-wise. We can argue though how much a raw performance matters for string interpolation. I'd personally very much appreciate to have a way to bypass any `String`s completely, but I'd prefer rather have string interpolation at least in some form than none at all.

Reviewer: It's not an issue for the qualified version `M.s""` which can do whatever it wants, most of the discussion is about the unqualified / default behaviour if we can even agree on one, of course no default until there's usage experience (e.g. a popular package) is also an option.

Currently the proposal produces `forall b. (IsString b, Monoid b) => b` in instance methods (which might be defined in other modules, recursive, etc), then passes it to something like `build :: StringBuilder -> String` (hence `b` is specialised to `StringBuilder`), and finally `fromString`). Previously this was one step going via `build :: Interpolator s => Builder s -> s` (hence `b` is specialised to the builder for the result type). So it still might not specialise well, but at least you're calling `<>`, `fromString` etc for the appropriate builder.

Instances will be provided as well, for example:

::

  instance Interpolate String where
    interpolateS = showString
  instance Interpolate Char where
    interpolateS = showChar

  instance Interpolate Int where
    interpolateS = shows
  instance Interpolate Double where
    interpolateS = shows
  instance Interpolate Bool where
    interpolateS = shows

  instance Interpolate a => Interpolate (Maybe a) where
    interpolateS Nothing = showString "Nothing"
    interpolateS (Just a) = showString "Just (" . interpolateS a . showChar ')'

Expansion
~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.interpolateString
    ( \convert raw append empty ->
                 raw "foo "
        `append` convert (f a b)
        `append` raw " bar "
        `append` convert (g x)
        `append` raw " baz "
        `append` convert name
        `append` empty
    )
    :: String

> 

Reviewer 3: An example outlining the expansion is nice, but can you add a paragraph outlining how the `istring` parts translate into the lambda? That would be the actual spec and that's what matters for the proposal. A bulleted list suffices, like

*  An `istringRaw` component `<str>` expands to `raw "<str>"`
* An `istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose` component of the form `${<exp>}` expands to `convert (<exp>)`
* The right-associated list of `istring` components between `istringBegin` and `istringEnd` expands to the expansion of the components, with `append` as "list cons" and `empty` as "list nil".

This makes me wonder: Why do we have `append` and `empty` in the first place? Why not just `List s`? The efficient concatenation logic could then just live in `mconcat` and the interface would be simpler. All the `interpolateString` examples use `mappend` and `mempty` to instantiate `append` and `empty`, which is exactly what `mconcat :: [s] -> s` would do. I think just using lists throughout to collect string components would be simpler.

Author: Yes, in most cases, I'd expect `mconcat` would work for most implementations. But it wouldn't work if someone wanted to build up an hlist-type value with string interpolation. The current expansion allows use-cases where `append` could change the type. I think it should be possible to implement something like the below with the current expansion, but not with `mconcat`:
```hs
import MyPrintf qualified

f :: Show a => a -> Int -> Text
f = MyPrintf.s"this is a showable: ${MyPrintf.show}, this is an int: ${MyPrintf.int}"
```
The current implementation also supports non-Monoid interpolations, if any such use-cases arise. So we trade a little complexity for generality, which I think is a good trade-off

Reviewer 3: Could we simplify the definition of interpolateString to
interpolateString f = f (fromString . interpolate) id mappend mempty

? This would immediately inline the default implementation of mappend and fuse away the list. That's what I do mentally every time I see the expansion of an interpolated string. Should have the same asymptotics because the type of append ensures association to the right.

---

> The current implementation also supports non-Monoid interpolations, if any such use-cases arise.

Fair point. (A bit more feedback on making this prominent in the proposal below.) Frankly, I'm unconvinced the `printf` or `HList` use case is worth supporting in return for such complexity, but we should let the committee decide. `Show a => a -> Int -> Text` is bending the definition of what I consider a string quite a lot.
Can you mention the potential simpliciation to Monoid in Alternatives? That is, two fewer second order parameters at the least.

Furthermore, wouldn't it then be possible to have a convert and raw in a type class (say... `Interpolate`??) that is overriden by the usual rebinding mechanism? Then we wouldn't need the second order encoding `withTypeClassMethodAsParameter $ (\convert raw -> ...)` (renaming `interpolateString` to `withTypeClassMethodAsParameter` to make a point) at all. It is likely that I'm missing something again here, however I just want to ensure that we see the full potential of this simplification.

Author: But what if a type overrides mconcat to be more efficient than mappends? IIUC Text's mappend will create a new Array and copy into it for each mappend, whereas Text's mconcat reads the total length once and builds an Array once

Reviewer 3: So let me compact and summarise what confuses me about the second order `interpolateString (\.. -> ...)` encoding.

The `Sql` and `Html` examples override the default `interpolateString`. I see that `Sql` wraps a `compileQuery`, but arguably I think the user could just wrap it themselves. Other than that, the implementation of `raw` and `convert` are overriden. But `raw` could just be `fromString` and `convert` could just be `interpolate` and the interpolation mechanism rebinds these. (Rebinding can change types.) So I suggest we expand simply as

```
    (             fromString "foo "
        `mappend` interpolate (f a b)
        `mappend` fromString " bar "
        `mappend` interpolate (g x)
        `mappend` fromString " baz "
        `mappend` interpolate name
        `mappend` mempty
    )
    :: String
```

And `Html` defines
```
fromString = raw
interpolate = Html.Interpolate.interpolate
```

And `Sql` defines
```
fromString = Data.String.fromString
interpolate = Sql.Interpolate.interpolate
```

I think this would be a *massive* simplification. Furthermore, it really nicely blends with `-XQualifiedStrings`, which builds on the same rebinding mechanism for `fromString`. Rebinding `interpolate` is just a compositional extension.

What use cases would we lose? We already lost `printf` when I suggested fixing `mappend` and `mempty`, I frankly haven't lost a tear. Anything else?

Reviewer 3: > But what if a type overrides mconcat to be more efficient than mappends? IIUC Text's mappend will create a new Array and copy into it for each mappend, whereas Text's mconcat reads the total length once and builds an Array once

Good point. So maybe bring back `mconcat [....]`. That's still a worthwhile simplification of the second order encoding.

```
mconcat
    [ fromString "foo "
    , interpolate (f a b)
    , fromString " bar "
    , interpolate (g x)
    , fromString " baz "
    , interpolate name
    ]
    :: String
```

Author: Two major points stick out to me:
1. Someone suggested this "pass a function to interpolateString" approach for language servers. It's nice to hover over a syntactic structure and have one canonical place to link to. With your suggested change, you'd link to the whole module? The interpolate function (even if there isnt an interpolation?)?
2. Allowing the implementor to provide a "finalizer" is important. Perhaps using a builder and a finalizer is more performant than immediately converting to the final type and mappending.

I see the desire to simplify the rank-2 encoding, but it's more general for not that much more complexity, which I think is the better trade-off for a language feature. Is this a major blocker, or can this just be another point to submit to the committee?

Author: I updated Alternatives more. Does that help address some of your concerns?

Reviewer 3: 1. I'd link to the `interpolate` or the `fromString` implementation. While I get that language servers are important, solving this problem properly is more an engineering problem in the language server implementation and it should not affect language design.
2. I think we shouldn't make this feature more complicated just to serve 3% of the use cases. If frameworks need a finalizer pass, then they should let users write `finalize s"...."`. It's much more explicit and the `s"..."` is simpler to understand.

> I see the desire to simplify the rank-2 encoding, but it's more general for not that much more complexity

In my opinion it's a *substantial* complication (the rank-2 encoding allows pretty complicated implementations) for almost no gain. But you can still submit to committee and we see what it thinks about this.

Author: > While I get that language servers are important, solving this problem properly is more an engineering problem in the language server implementation and it should not affect language design.

Fair enough

> In my opinion it's a substantial complication (the rank-2 encoding allows pretty complicated implementations) for almost no gain. But you can still submit to committee and we see what it thinks about this.

I guess we'll agree to disagree. Here are my priorities:
1. I strongly think allowing some finalizer pattern is useful and makes some use-cases ergonomic, such as finalizing Builders.
2. I somewhat prefer the rank-2 encoding, however _if_ we do have a finalizer, I think the rank-2 encoding makes it more elegant than having separate `M.finalize`/`M.interpolate` functions

> [!NOTE]
> To be pendantic, it's not technically a rank-2 encoding. The built-in `interpolateString` is, yes, but a custom interpolator need not be rank-2; i.e. the expansion itself is not rank-2. Here's an example custom interpolator that's not rank-2:
> ```hs
> -- Only Text may be interpolated in a SimpleText interpolation
> interpolateString ::
>   ( (Text -> SimpleText)
>     -> (String -> SimpleText)
>     -> (SimpleText -> SimpleText -> SimpleText)
>     -> SimpleText
>   )
>   -> SimpleText
> interpolateString f = f SimpleText fromString mappend mempty
> ```
> But I understand we're probably using "rank-2" as shorthand for "CPS style"

> But you can still submit to committee and we see what it thinks about this.

I'd like to submit to the committee now and see!

Reviewer 3: > I'd like to submit to the committee now and see!

Done!

  newtype Builder = Builder (Endo String)
    deriving newtype (Monoid, Semigroup)

  build :: Builder -> String
  build (Builder (Endo f)) = f ""

  interpolateString f = f convert raw mappend mempty
    where
      convert = Builder . Endo . interpolateS
      raw = Builder . Endo . showString

With this definition, one can nest interpolated strings with linear performance:

::

  {-# LANGUAGE QualifiedStrings #-}
  {-# LANGUAGE StringInterpolation #-}

  import Data.String.Builder.Interpolate qualified as B

  main = do
    let name = "Alice"
    let age = 10

    let s1 = B.s"Name: ${name}!"
    let s2 = B.s"Age: ${age}!"

    print $ B.build B.s"${s1} + ${s2}"

Text
~~~~

``text`` would not need any specific work, since it already supports ``IsString``. But it would be highly recommended for ``text`` to define a module for use with ``QualifiedStrings``:

::

  module Data.Text.Interpolate where

  import Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental qualified as S

  interpolateString ::
    ( (forall a. Interpolate a => a -> Text)
        -> (String -> Text)
        -> (Text -> Text -> Text)
        -> Text
        -> Text
    )
    -> Text

>   interpolateString = S.interpolateString

Reviewer 3: Does this still type-check?

Author: Good catch, I'll update that.

Thanks for your diligence!

Instances will be provided as well, for example:

::

  instance Interpolate String where
    interpolateS = showString
  instance Interpolate Char where
    interpolateS = showChar

  instance Interpolate Int where
    interpolateS = shows
  instance Interpolate Double where
    interpolateS = shows
  instance Interpolate Bool where
    interpolateS = shows

  instance Interpolate a => Interpolate (Maybe a) where
    interpolateS Nothing = showString "Nothing"
    interpolateS (Just a) = showString "Just (" . interpolateS a . showChar ')'

Expansion
~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.interpolateString
    ( \convert raw append empty ->
                 raw "foo "
        `append` convert (f a b)
        `append` raw " bar "
        `append` convert (g x)
        `append` raw " baz "
        `append` convert name
        `append` empty
    )
    :: String

Namely:

* An ``istringRaw <str>`` component expands to ``raw "<str>"``

> * An ``istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose`` component expands to ``convert (<exp>)``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* An ``istringExprOpen <exp> istringExprClose`` component expands to ``convert (<exp>)``
```
for consistency

Author: These are technically different, though. `istringRaw` is the token, and `<str>` is data stored in that lexical token. `istringExprOpen` and `istringExprClose` are tokens, and `exp` is a stand-in for multiple tokens making up an `exp` in the Parser. I wasn't sure the best way to express this here

Reviewer 3: Makes sense. Sorry for the noise.

* The right-associated list of ``istring`` components between ``istringBegin`` and ``istringEnd`` expands to the expansion of the components, with ``append`` as "list cons" and ``empty`` as "list nil".

>     * We opt to keep this general instead of hardcoding to ``mconcat`` to support non-Monoid use-cases

Reviewer 3: It's a bit cryptic what such non-Monoid use-cases are. So maybe 
```suggestion
    * We opt to keep this general instead of hardcoding to ``mconcat`` to support type-changing ``append`` operators.
```

        `append` empty
    )
    :: String

``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`` will be initially provided by ``ghc-experimental``, containing the following:

::

  -- See *Section 2.4* for the type of this definition
  interpolateString f = mconcat $ f (fromString . interpolate) id (:) []

  class Interpolate a where
    {-# MINIMAL interpolate | interpolateS #-}

    interpolate :: a -> String
    interpolate x = interpolateS x ""

    interpolateS :: a -> ShowS
    interpolateS x s = interpolate x <> s

Lexical Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.2 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-17700010.2>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

Add ``istring*`` patterns to ``lexeme`` (not ``literal``, because they're not literals):

.. code-block:: abnf

  lexeme  → qvarid | qconid | qvarsym | qconsym
          | literal | special | reservedop | reservedid
          | istringBegin
          | istringRaw
          | istringExprOpen
          | istringExprClose
          | istringEnd
          | istringMultilineBegin
          | istringMultilineRawStartLine
          | istringMultilineRawMidLine
          | istringMultilineEnd

>           | istringQualifiedBegin

Reviewer 3: What are these constructors defined for? There are no productions mentioning them.

Author: ah the istringQualified* constructors? Yes, it seems like I forgot to add those

Author: Looks like I already handled them in istringBegin/istringMultilineBegin. REmoved

          | istringQualifiedMultilineBegin

  istringBegin → 's"' | modid . 's"'

>   istringRaw → {graphic⟨'\' | '"' | '${'⟩ | space | escape | gap}

Reviewer 3: It appears you can't write `'${'` inside `⟨...⟩`, because `${` is not a single character. I think you mean something like

```
istringRaw → {graphic⟨'\' | '"' | '$'⟩ | '$'⟨'{'⟩ | space | escape | gap}
```

Similarly for the multiline variant.

Author: Do we need to be this precise? Yes, this won't work exactly with Alex grammar, but the Haskell report is loose about its notation, simply saying that any pattern may appear between the angle brackets: https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch2.html#x7-150002.1

If we need to be extremely precise, I think it would have to be this:
```
  istringRaw → {graphic⟨'\' | '"' | '$'⟩ | '$' graphic⟨'\' | '"' | '{'⟩ | space | escape | gap} {'$'}
```
This handles `s"$"` correctly. But this seems overly pedantic

Reviewer 3: Upon reflection, I think you are right. Let's not kid ourselves; GHC's implementation of the Lexer is the spec of the Lexer. If we ever need a standalone spec, we'd need to derive it from the .x file.

  istringExprOpen → '${'
  istringExprClose → '}'
  istringEnd → '"'

  istringMultilineBegin → 's"""' | modid . 's"""'
  istringMultilineRawStartLine → {whitechar} istringMultilineRawMidLine
  istringMultilineRawMidLine → {graphic⟨'\' | '"""' | '${'⟩ | space | escape | gap}
  istringMultilineEnd → '"""'

Also add ``$`` to ``charesc``:

.. code-block:: abnf

  charesc → a | b | f | n | r | t | v | \ | " | ' | & | $

With ``$`` added to ``charesc``, interpolation can be avoided by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``s"\${foo}" == "${foo}"``.

> This grammar enables interpolating expressions with nested braces. See *Section 3.1* for examples.

Reviewer 3: This just points at examples like s"a ${User{a = 1}} b", which illustrate the desired behaviour but don't specify how the lexer achieves it.

I think it would help to say here that nesting of braces etc. is tracked through some Alex-native mechanism (states?) to track the nesting of { when inside a ${. istringExprClose is only lexed when the nesting depth is 1. At least I believe this is how it works. It would be good to clarify.

Author: Yes, it uses Alex start codes. I'll add a note of this

Context-Free Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.5 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-18000010.5>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

.. code-block:: abnf

  aexp → qvar
       | ...
       | istring
       | istringMultiline

  istring →
    istringBegin
      {istringRaw | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose}
      istringEnd

  istringMultiline →
    istringMultilineBegin
      {istringMultilineRawStartLine | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose istringMultilineRawMidLine}
      istringMultilineEnd

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental``. After the API has stablized, these would eventually live in ``Data.String`` alongside ``IsString``.

::

  type SimpleStringInterpolator s =

>     (IsString s, Monoid s) =>

Reviewer 3: This duplicates the `(IsString s, Monoid s)` from the definition of `interpolateString`.

Is this really the simplest type possible? Furthermore, I'm wondering why the `(s -> s) -> (...) -> s -> s` isn't just a type class on `s`. It sounds to me like you want

```
class ReallyIsString s extends IsString s, Monoid s where
  raw :: s -> s
  interpolate' :: Interpolate a => a -> s
  append :: s -> s -> s
  end :: s
```

It all sounds pretty ad-hoc to me. What's the difference between `append` and `mconcat`??

Author: This type arises from how `interpolateString` is used, see the "Expansion" section. SimpleStringInterpolate is simply the type of the `interpolateString` provided in `base`, with the type `s` parametrized so that other implementations can monomorphize it.

For example:
* `base` would have the default `(IsString s) => SimpleStringInterpolator s` implementation
* `Data.Text.Qualified` should provide `SimpleStringInterpolator Text` where `interpolateString = D.S.Q.E.interpolateString` (uses the same Interpolate mechanism, just lifted to Text)
* `Data.Text.Builder.Qualified` might want to implement `interpolateString` with their own InterpolateText class and using Text.Builder instead of mconcat. So `Data.Text.Builder.Qualified` would write their own type instead of reusing `SimpleStringInterpolator`

In other words, `SimpleStringInterpolator` is exactly the type of the built-in `interpolateString` implementation, and any custom interpolators that just want to monomorphize the built-in one (which interpolates to String with Interpolate and lifts with fromString) would use this type. Any other implementation should write their own type

    ( (forall a. Interpolate a => a -> s)
      -> (s -> s)
      -> (s -> s -> s)
      -> s
      -> s
    )
    -> s

  interpolateString :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => SimpleStringInterpolator s

>   interpolateString f = mconcat $ f (fromString . interpolate) id (:) []

Reviewer 3: Does this type-check?? `(:) :: s -> s -> s` sounds very unlikely to me.

Author: ah I wrote the type of SimpleStringInterpolator wrong. It should be
```hs
( (a -> s)
  -> (s -> s)
  -> (s -> [s] -> [s])
  -> [s]
  -> [s]
)
-> s
```

Reviewer 3: Still different to what is in the proposal. Honestly, both types look wrong to me. I think the original type was right, but `(:)` and `[]` is wrong. You want `<>` and `mempty`. Please type check!

Author: Sorry, the type I wrote in the comment is correct, the proposal was wrong (and has been fixed).

I just ran it in ghci:
```hs
GHCi, version 9.12.2: https://www.haskell.org/ghc/  :? for help
ghci> import Data.String
ghci> class Interpolate a where interpolate :: a -> String
ghci> :{
ghci|   type SimpleStringInterpolator s =
ghci|     ( (forall a. Interpolate a => a -> s)
ghci|       -> (s -> s)
ghci|       -> (s -> [s] -> [s])
ghci|       -> [s]
ghci|       -> [s]
ghci|     )
ghci|     -> s
ghci|
ghci|   interpolateString :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => SimpleStringInterpolator s
ghci|   interpolateString f = mconcat $ f (fromString . interpolate) id (:) []
ghci|   {-# INLINE interpolateString #-}
ghci| :}
ghci> instance Interpolate Bool where interpolate = show
ghci> interpolateString $ \convert raw append empty -> raw "asdf" `append` (convert True `append` empty)
"asdfTrue"
```

This is the intended implementation for the built-in `interpolateString`: we build it up as a list of `IsString s => s`, and then `mconcat` it all together at the end. This should work and be as efficient as possible for any `IsString, Monoid` type.

Again, this logic (`(append, empty) = ((:), [])`) is _only_ for the built-in `interpolateString`; if someone wishes to implement `interpolateString` themselves (and not just export a monomorphized version of the built-in one), they have total control over the type and implementation

Reviewer 3: Good, thanks for verifying. A minor point: using lists (instead of, e.g., DLists) to accumulate the parts to ultimately `mconcat` them isn't very efficient... But this is just a minor implementation detail. Although maybe it would be good to generalize the type of `SimpleStringInterpolate` like this to unfix `[]` as the string collection:

```
  type SimpleStringInterpolator s =
    ( forall ss.
      (forall a. Interpolate a => a -> s)
      -> (s -> s)
      -> (s -> ss -> ss)
      -> ss
      -> ss
    )
    -> s
```

Author: Good idea to generalize `[]`, I'll do that.

Can you elaborate on the inefficiency of lists? I don't see how DLists would improve performance here

Reviewer 3: Good point. Indeed, I don't think DLists would help here at all; there is no append on `ss` that could be right associated by using it. Fine :+1: I'll hand off to the committee soon

* Hardcode a wired-in ``Interpolate`` class with ``convert`` (and potentially ``raw``)

  * Eliminates the whole benefit of a rebindable ``interpolateString``; having a blessed ``Interpolate`` class with a ``convert :: something`` function means everyone has to use that ``something`` type. The whole benefit of a rebindable ``interpolateString`` is, just like ``QualifiedDo``, as long as it typechecks, you can make its type whatever you want.

* Replace the callback ``M.interpolateString $ \raw convert append empty -> raw "age: " `append` convert age `append` empty`` with the expression directly, e.g. ``M.fromString "age: " `M.mappend` M.convert age `M.mappend` M.mempty``.

  * This would remove the major benefit of having one function to link to when clicking into an interpolated string, in an IDE / using a language server
  * This would also remove the ability to add a "finalizer", where perhaps it's more efficient to append in one type, but the final type should be "compiled"/"built" in some fashion
    * You could add ``M.finalizeInterpolatedString`` at the end, but then that's becoming more complicated than the current approach

>   * See also the other alternatives to hardcode the operations

Author: @simonpj Pulling your comment https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#issuecomment-4277067621 into a thread.

@sgraf812 was also suggesting a similar simplification here: https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#discussion_r3071243178, which I discuss this under "Expansion-related Alternatives". But your comment gets at something more fundamental about the proposal that we should clear up.

The core idea in this proposal is:
1. The built-in `s"..."` interpolation _only_ uses `IsString` and a `convert :: a -> String` function.
    * Ultimately ends up being `mconcat [fromString "...", fromString $ convert x]`
    * We use `mconcat` because instances may implement a more efficient version than a bunch of `mappend`s (e.g. `Text`)
2. Any implementation that wants to deviate should implement their own and use a custom qualified `M.s"..."` interpolation, which has total control over the implementation
    * Whether this is one `interpolateString` function that takes a callback, or whether this is just the expanded expression directly is an implementation detail we can discuss later; the important thing is that `M.s"..."` can do any arbitrary logic

The benefit of this is simplicity: there's no multi-param `Convert` type class and no `X` type family. The built-in `s"..."` interpolation should work very well with type inference, and should be "good-enough" in most normal `IsString` cases.

This should perhaps be the start of our discussion – do we want this "simple built-in, use qualified for more advanced use-cases" approach, or do we want to make the built-in approach more complex so that more things can be done without reaching for qualified interpolators? This question needs to be answered before I talk about the rest of your comment

Author: @simonpj Responding to your comment https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#issuecomment-4278694789 here. Feel free to reply in this thread (instead of a top-level comment) so that we can see the full conversation together. (If multiple people comment at the same time, it's hard to parse it when everything is a top-level comment)

---

> So yes, it would be great to bring it out.

Yes, I updated the proposal!

> I don't see any use of IsString, do I? If you really wanted a simple thing, using strings only, would you not say that your example desugars to this?

The built-in `s"..."` interpolation uses `fromString` (see my previous comment). Perhaps it's a bit confusing, since I'm separating the expansion from the implementation.

The expansion is generic, and does not use `IsString`:
```hs
interpolateString $ \convert raw append empty ->
  raw "asdf" `append` convert x `append` empty
```

But the built-in implementation uses `IsString` to implement the callback:

```hs
-- Simplified, for illustration; the implementation in the proposal uses mconcat
interpolateString f = f convert raw append empty
  where
    convert = fromString . interpolate -- IsString
    raw = id -- The string literal passed to `raw` is affected by IsString
    append = mappend
    empty = mempty
```

> Hmm. If that's sufficient then this design would work fine:

I think there's one key disconnect between the 2 alternatives you're proposing and this proposal: we need to distinguish the desugaring from the implementation. In other words, I'd like to frame the discussion in this way:
* `M.s"..."` allows users to define their own string interpolator in module `M`, which has total control over how things get interpolated
    * Both `StringInterpolation` and `QualifiedStrings` is required for this syntax to be legal
* `s"..."` is equivalent to `Data.String.Interpolate.s"..."`, where `Data.String.Interpolate` is defined in `base`
    * Only `StringInterpolation` is required for this syntax to be legal

Ultimately, your alternatives are trying to make the built-in `s"..."` more flexible by allowing ad-hoc polymorphism on the interpolation type, whereas I'm arguing that's not necessary since we have the `M.s"..."` syntax for full flexibility.

One key limitation of your alternative is that every string-like type (e.g. `Text`, `ByteString`) that wants to support interpolation needs to define their own `Interpolate` instance. The built-in `s"..."` syntax in the current proposal works for _all_ `IsString` types automatically (with `OverloadedStrings` enabled).

Furthermore, `Convert` would need N*M instances, where `Text` would also need to re-define all the `Convert` instances lifted into `Text` instead of `String`. The current proposal has a type class that always converts to `String`, and lifts with `fromString`. While perhaps not the most performant (always converting via String), it's "good enough" and "just works".

I added a section to the appendix "Alternative - Polymorphic interpolable expansion". See if that helps address your concerns.

Reviewer 22: Sorry to be so slow.  I think I now have a clearer idea of the design space.

Here is my analysis.  We basically agree that our poster-child example
`s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"` desugars to
```
finalise
  (            raw "foo "
      `append` convert (f a b)
      `append` raw " bar "
      `append` convert (g x)
      `append` raw " baz "
      `append` convert name
      `append` empty
  )
```
The question is: **what are `finalise`, `raw`, `append` and so on bound to?**

Here are three possible answers:

1. Work like do-notation or `-XOverloadedStrings`:
   * In do-notation the operations `(>>=)`, `(>>)` in the desugaring come from the class `Monad`.
   * With `-XOverloadedStrings` the function `fromString` comes from a class `IsString`.

   We can do the exact same thing for these interpolated operations.

2. Work like `-XQualifiedDo` or `-XQualifiedStrings`:
   * In `M.do { ... }` the operations `(>>=)` etc in the desugaring are qualified as `M.(>>=)` etc
   * In `M."foo"` the `fromString` operation desugars to `M.fromString`.

   We can do the exact same thing for the new interpolated strings `M.s"foo ${f a b}"` etc.

3. Some other way.  I think you are proposing something like lambda-binding `raw`, `append` etc,
   desugaring to this:
   ```
   finalise $ \raw append convert empty ->
                  raw "foo "
         `append` convert (f a b)
         `append` raw " bar "
         `append` convert (g x)
         `append` raw " baz "
         `append` convert name
         `append` empty
   ```
   But that *still* leaves the question of what `finalise` is bound to.  Perhaps it is a method
   of a type class.  Perhaps it is `M.finalise`, for a `M.s"..."` qualified literal.  Or
   something else again.  Given this, I don't think the lambda buys us anything except extra
   complexity.

**I think we need a very strong argument to do anything other than (1) or (2), because those are
the approaches we take for existing constructs.** I don't yet see that very strong argument.
Would you like to articulate it.

**Separately**, under design (1) `convert` is a method of a type-class.  What is the type of
its first argument?  You argue for using `fromString` to go via `String`, which avoids
the necessity of a 2-parameter type class, or a type function.  But we'd pay a real
price in efficiency I think.  If we were trying to build (say) a `ByteString`, say, we don't
really want to go via a `String`.

But this is a *sub-question* within design (1) and maybe design (3).  (It does not apply
to qualified-interpolated-strings design (2), I think.)  Let's settle 1 vs 2 vs 3 first.

Reviewer: I don't think strictly speaking it is differing from 1 (unqualified/wired in) and 2 (qualified).
Since in any case interpolateString (which is what is called finalise in your comment on 3. but differs from finalise at the start) behaves exactly the same - defaults to something wired in, and is grabbed from a module if qualified.
Though in the situation where we don't agree on the wired-in behaviour, but do agree on the qualified behaviour, we could have the latter before or without having the former.

I think what differs here is only that there are multiple parts to it, and how those multiple parts are supplied.
Though I agree the lambda approach does diverge from the tradition of separate names (which may well be on the same class, or not, depending on wired in vs qualified vs rebindablesyntax etc). I think there are a number of trade offs involved here and wanted to also point out two extra alternatives:

1. Lambda approach suggested in the proposal
2. N separate methods - N = 5 currently, which is a lot and I think shows some downsides of the current QualifiedDo approach
3. Type class (presumably on the result of interpolation?) or record type (one specially named binding of the record type) defined by GHC. The former arguably doesn't make much sense with QualifiedDo and is what you'd expect from the wired in version.
4. Custom module record type (one specially named binding of it) whose specially named methods/fields are magically accessed by GHC (even if not exported or only partially exported and NoFieldSelectors)
5. Method operating on lossless representation of the literal i.e. a heterogeneous list with literal parts as SSymbols. This was my suggestion earlier before it was pointed out to me if the types aren't restricted then the strings passed to raw could also be type level symbols and ends up equivalent.

2 has the major downside of requiring multiple exports, which might not even have very good names.
This is not particularly great in terms of export hygiene before you consider that the names are fixed. Consider Comonad.do using (=>>) implies the export (Comonad.>>=) = (=>>), but you probably don't ever want someone to use Comonad.>>= directly but are forced to allow it or needlessly require an extra .Do at each use site (and an extra import). As it so happens Data.Text for example already exports empty and append, and I could possibly imagine raw being fromString (*) or redundant (under OverloadedStrings**). But on the flip side, if it wanted to use builders, its current append and empty might well be inadmissible using 2 precisely because those are the same names.

3 has the major downside of restricting the types to purely common string-like/monoid types, possibly with builders. Which is admittedly the common case, but not the only case and Haskell is the perfect example of a language where people want to sprinkle in extra types in strange ways.

2, 3 and 4 do have an advantage over 1 with regards to forwards compatibility e.g. new methods for extended syntax, or deprecated methods - via defaults, PatternSynonyms etc standard approaches, or for separate bindings you can always have GHC react to whether they are available or not. 1 with undecorated parameters is maximally brittle here.

4 has the downside of being a new approach but could be retrofitted to other extensions e.g. used if available. With both an appropriate name (e.g. doNotationBindings for QualifiedDo) it is extremely unlikely this will introduce a conflict (especially given it would also need to happen to have e.g. (>>), (>>=) fields, and NoFieldSelectors to avoid already having a name binding conflict within the module with existing (>>) etc).

5 hopes the methods inline so GHC replaces all the constructors in the list. This wasn't popular but I can't recall the reason. It doesn't really have any innate advantage if the types are loose enough in the other approaches. It worked well with type inference for nesting, but who would ever nest interpolated literals and why?

I have no clue which ones inline better. 1 and 5 would at least be one method, but then if that delegates to other bindings (it probably does) you're back in the same place. Also perhaps less importantly is which method is cleaner to document (e.g. is it possible to document fields in haddock with NoFieldSelectors? You probably still want to see the types of the fields)

\*  This might have to use a newtype on ShowS with an IsString instance to match the proposal's definition of the default/wired in approach, if it would be able to at all.
** Incidentally OverloadedStrings is a bit redundant with this extension, apart from not needing an s prefix.
   I would have been happy with the tersest possible unprefixed unbracketed "$aexp", but I can see why that isn't popular.

Author: Thanks for the engagement! Let me attempt to focus on one thread and see if pulling that clarifies everything else.

Let's ignore QualifiedStrings for a second, so we only have `s"..."` to deal with. I like SPJ's framing of this: we agree on the expansion, the only difference is what they are bound to. (We'll call these the "binding options")
* Option 1 - In a simplified proposal, they are 5 top-level functions provided by `base`
* Option 2 - In the current proposal, they are bound to lambda bindings in a callback function
    * The outer `finalise` or `interpolateString` function is the 1 function provided by base

First, note that these are actually **equivalent**. Let's say you have the 5 top-level functions in the simplified proposal. The current proposal could then be packaged as

```hs
-- finalise/convert/raw/append/empty are the 5
-- top-level functions
interpolateString f = finalise $ f convert raw append empty
```

So all of SPJ's ideas of using typeclasses etc. is all possible whether we use a simplified construction, or the callback construction.

So now that we've proven the equivalence of the two approaches, what should the implementation of these 5 functions be? (we'll call these the "machinery options")
* Option A - A hardcoded implementation using only IsString, a typeclass with `interpolate :: a -> String`, and Monoid (the current proposal)
* Option B - A typeclass with all 5 functions in it + a multiparam typeclass with `interpolate :: a -> s`
    * The first mega-typeclass could have a Builder type family or not; we'll leave that out of scope for now

Both machinery options here are possible with either binding options above. So we have a 2x2 matrix, with both axes able to be evaluated independently. I'm sure one could come up with many more variants, but let's focus on this matrix for now.

SPJ is suggesting 1B. This has the benefit of being simpler, following the design of OverloadedStrings, and doesn't require QualifiedStrings to have a decent, peformant overloading mechanism. However, my counterpoints are:
* I posit that if we had QualifiedStrings in the first place, we wouldn't have OverloadedStrings at all, or at least it would be much less used. So for this new feature, we should design with QualifiedStrings in mind, not OverloadedStrings
* QualifiedStrings is much more flexible than OverloadedStrings, since there's no fixed type. In other words, anything OverloadedStrings can do, QualifiedStrings can do, but not vice-versa. (Also, do-notation vs QualifiedDo)
* So if we plan on supporting QualifiedStrings anyway, there's no point making one mega-typeclass in option B. Having a hardcoded implementation in option A is good enough for the common case, and anything that wishes to deviate from the hardcoded implementation can use QualifiedStrings
* Option A also has the benefit of working **for free** for any IsString+Monoid type. Option B would require writing new instances for each new string-like type that wants to use interpolation
* Option 1 vs Option 2 is not as interesting of a discussion. Both work with QualifiedStrings; the only question is whether we're rebinding 1 or 5 functions.
    * @simonpj - The thing I struggled with when trying to respond to your comment is that you pit OverloadedStrings (1) against QualifiedStrings (2), but I don't see why they're being evaluated against each other. The proposal allows for both `s"..."` and `M.s"..."` syntaxes; it's not one over the other. And the lambda option (3) works with both constructs, so I struggled to see what's being compared

Does that move the discussion any further?

Reviewer 22: Gah!  I have gotten totally sucked into this!  Some more reflections.

> I like SPJ's framing of this: we agree on the expansion, the only difference is what they are bound to. (We'll call these the "binding options")

OK very good.

I agree that (1) and (2) are not alternatives.  They are simply the
unqualified and qualified versions of the feature respectively.

I think we actually have THREE choices

## Binding options: (O1) vs (O2) vs (O3)

* Option (O1).  There are 5 top-level functions provided by `base`.  The expansion is for `s"foo{bar}"` is:
  ```
  finalise (raw "foo" `append` convert bar)
  ```

* Option (O2) - In the current proposal, they are bound to lambda bindings in a callback function.  The expansion is:
  ```
  interpolate $ \(MkB { finalise=finalise, append=append, raw=raw, convert=convert} ->
                finalise (raw "foo" `append` convert bar)
  ```
  Here `bld :: Builder s` is a record of functions, defined thus:
  ```
  data Builder s = forall b.
                   MkB { finalise :: b -> s
                       , append   :: b -> b -> b
                       , empty    :: b
                       , raw      :: String -> b
                       , convert  :: ...see below... }
  ```
  The outer `interpolate` is the one function provided by `base`:

* Option (O3) is a curried version of (O2).  There is no `Builder` type.  The expansion is
  ```
  interpolate $ \finalise append raw convert empty ->
                finalise (raw "foo" `append` convert bar)
  ```

In all three cases, if you use the "qualified" format, thus `M.s"foo{bar}"`, you get a `M.` prefix
on all the special names.  Thus:
* (O1):
  ```
  M.finalise (M.raw "foo" `M.append` M.convert bar)
  ```
* (O2)
  ```
  M.interpolate $ \(M.MkB { finalise=finalise, append=append, raw=raw, convert=convert} ->
                  finalise (raw "foo" `append` convert bar)
  ```
* (O3)  
  ```
  M.interpolate $ \finalise append raw convert empty ->
                  finalise (raw "foo" `append` convert bar)
  ```

## Result options (R1) vs (R2) vs (R3)

All of (O1) ...(O3) require one or more functions or data constructors "provided by `base`".  Now we have another **separate, orthogonal** choice about what "provided by `base`" means:

* Option (R1). These `base` functions are overloaded, so that the literal can stand for values of different types, such as `String` or `ByteString` or `Text`.  With (O1) this would  look like:
  ```
  class IsInterpolatedString s b where
     finalise :: b -> s
     append :: b -> b -> b
     empty :: b
     raw :: String -> b
     convert :: ..see below..
  ```
  Here `s` is the overall result type (returned by `finalise`), while `b` is the intermediate "builder" type, optimised for construction. For strings, `s` might be `String` while `b` is `String -> String`.

  We could use a type family instead, thus `finalise :: Builder s -> s`.

  I have named the class `IsInterpolatedString` just to distinguish it from the class `Interpolate` in the proposal, which plays an entirely different role.    Also to stress the similarity with class `IsString`.

  With (O2), option (R1) would look like:
  ```
  class InterpolateC s where
     builder :: Builder s

  interpolate :: InterpolateC s => (Builder s -> s) -> s
  interpolate f = f builder
  ```

* Option (R2).  The `base` functions are fixed, providing just one return type, `String`. No type class `IsInterpolatedString` is needed.  For (O1) this looks like
  ```
  finalise :: ShowS -> String
  append :: ShowS -> ShowS -> ShowS
  raw :: String -> String
  convert :: forall a. Interpolate a => a -> ShowS

  class Interpolate s where { interpolateS :: a -> ShowS }
  ```
  Recall that `type ShowS = String -> String`; it is used during construction so we get efficient append.

  The class `Interpolate` is exactly like `Show` but intended for a different purpose, so you might give a slightly different implementation for `shows` and `interpolateS`.

  If you want a different return type, use qualified notation `M.s"blah"`.

* Option (R3).  Exactly like (R2) except that
  ```
  finalise :: IsString s => ShowS -> s
  ```
  This allows an interpolated string to work for other types, precisely like `-XOverloadedStrings`.  Indeed, perhaps the (R2) vs (R3) choice could be controlled by `-XOverloadedStrings`.

### Convert options (C1) vs (C2)

Finally there is yet another **separate orthogonal** choice: how to handle `convert`.   I'll express the choice using (O2). We want `convert` to be an overloaded function that converts from some *aritrary* type `a` to the builder type `b`. Options:

* Option (C1): go via string:
  ```
  data Builder s = forall b. B { ...; convert :: forall a. Show a => a -> b }
  ```
  All `convert` requires from the argument type is that it can be converted to a String;
  hence `Show`.  Then `convert` can convert that `String` to a `b`.

* Option (C2): convert directly:
  ```
  data Builder s = forall b. B { ...; convert :: forall a. Convertable a b => a -> b }
  ```

## Discussion: (O1) vs (O2)

* Other things being equal, (O1) is simpler and more like what we do for do-notation and overloaded strings.
* (O2) makes things a bit harder for the optimiser. Not impossible but harder.
* Like Brandon, I thought that (O1) and (O2) were equivalent.  But actually, having written it out I can see that there *is* a difference.  Just look at the `Builder` record: it has an *existential* variable `b`, something we can't do with a type class.  That's very nice indeed.

## (R1) vs (R2)

Brandon's view is that we we should always have used design (R2) for strings;
and that `-XOverloadedStrings` is a mistake.

But if that is true, does that mean that overloaded numeric literals is a mistake too?
Should the literal `3` always have type `Int`?  We can get other types using qualified
literals: `Data.Integer.3 :: Integer`, `Data.Float.3 :: Float` etc.#

But that would be notationally very heavy would it not?  And, more fundamentally,
we could not write
```
f :: Num a => a -> a
f x = x + 1
```
In the same way, might we not want to write
```
g :: (Monoid s, IsInterpolatedString s) => Int -> s -> s
g x y = s"hello {x}" `mappend` y
```
Just like `f`, the function `g` has a literal *that must be overloaded*.

Option (R2) is viable.  But it definitely removes expressiveness, and consistency
with strings and numbers is valuable.

## Discussion: (C1) vs (C2)

(C2) is direct and efficient, but:
* We need a lot of instances, one for each pair of types.
* Ambiguity beckons, e.g.  `s"hello {88}"`.  Is that `88` an `Integer` or an `Int` or what?  It might make a difference to how we stuff it into the result.

Author: > Result options (R1) vs (R2)

There's another Result option, R3, which is the option in the proposal: The base functions are fixed to `IsString s => s`. It's basically R2 with a `fromString` at the end. (Technically, we `fromString` as soon as possible and append as `s`, but for the sake of discussion, let's pretend R3 is `fromString . R2`)

> But if that is true, does that mean that overloaded numeric literals is a mistake too?

Yeah, that's a good point; maybe, maybe not. It's often a source of confusion for beginners to see polymorphic types when doing `1 + 2` in ghci, maybe it _would_ have been nice to just force `Int`. Relatedly, I would argue that having `Maybe.do` from the beginning might've been nice; having the same syntax for all monads is nice, but it can be difficult in some places to understand exactly what monad we're in.

That being said, while numbers have a lot of useful operations while staying polymorphic, I'm not sure I've written one function that was polymorphic over a string-like type. In almost every case where I'm using a string literal, I always have exactly one string type in mind for it. I strongly believe that the polymorphism of R1 will bite people much more often than people would take advantage of it.

> e.g.  `s"hello {88}"`.  Is that `88` an `Integer` or an `Int` or what?

This is true no matter what. Both C1 and C2 take in a polymorphic `a`, so you always have to monomorphize inputs. But yes, the "instance per pair of types" is the main drawback to C2.

> Here `bld :: Builder s` is a record of functions, defined thus:

I just want to double check our understanding here. The definition of `Builder` you define here is _only_ for the builtin `s"..."` syntax. Once you qualify it with `M.s"..."`, you replace with `M.interpolateString $ \bld -> ...`, and **the module M has total control over `interpolateString`, both the type and implementation**. So it doesn't really make sense to define `Builder` since it would be static with `s"..."`, and unused with `M.s"..."`.

Reviewer 22: Ah that is an excellent point.  All I intended to do was to replace a *curried* function argumen to `interpolateString` with an uncurried one, with a tuple argument, which I dignified with a name `Builder`.  To me that helped a lot to understand what was going on.

But you are right that, with the curried form (your proposal) `M.interpolateString` could utterly change the types of `raw` etc.

I suppose that the uncurried desugaring could be
```
M.interpolateString $ \(M.Builder { .. } -> 
    finalise (raw "foo" `append` convert bar)
```
where the `{..}` wildcard binds `raw` etc from the data constructor `M.Builder`.   Then we need two `M.` things available `M.interpolateString` and `M.Builder`.

Currying vs not-currying is a matter of taste. 

> There's another Result option, R3, which is the option in the proposal: The base functions are fixed to IsString s => s. It's basically R2 with a fromString at the end

I didn't understand that.  Could you flesh it out, perhaps just copy/pasting the key lines of the proposal?  I have updated my version of (R2) to be more explicit.  I'm not sure how (R3) differs.

Author: > where the `{..}` wildcard binds `raw` etc from the data constructor `M.Builder`. Then we need two `M.` things available `M.interpolateString` and `M.Builder`.

Yes, that's possible too; it could also be simplified to
```hs
(\M.Builder{..} -> ...) M.stringBuilder
```
I can understand how this might be easier to understand, but having 2 exports is still less ideal than 1, and importing a data type through qualified-syntax is even more unprecedented. But yes, the two approaches should be equivalent, so yes, it's a matter of taste.

> I didn't understand that. Could you flesh it out, perhaps just copy/pasting the key lines of the proposal? I have updated my version of (R2) to be more explicit. I'm not sure how (R3) differs.

Like I mentioned, the proposal does something slightly different, but in spirit, it behaves like the following:
```hs
{----- R2, eliding ShowS for simplicity -----}

finaliseR2 :: String -> String
finaliseR2 = id

appendR2 :: String -> String -> String
appendR2 = mappend

rawR2 :: String -> String
rawR2 = id

convertR2 :: forall a. Show a => a -> String
convertR2 = show

{----- R3 -----}

finaliseR3 :: IsString s => String -> s
finaliseR3 = fromString

appendR3 = appendR2
rawR3 = rawR2
convertR3 = convertR2
```

This is all covered in the Machinery section, if you want to take another look at that section with the new context you've gotten from this thread.

Reviewer 22: Ah I see.  I have upated my analysis to include (R3). Do you agree with it?

So now we have agreed some clearly articulated, and orthogonal, design choices.   Do you think they now form a fair description of the design space?

Question: which ones (if any) do you feel strongly about?  It affects the discussion if the author says "it's a toss-up whether we choose A or B" vs "I really think that B is much much better".

Reviewer 23: That is a lot to catch up on. Thanks for the detailed menu @simonpj. Taking them in order:

## Binding Options
Regarding O1 (a design that follows `do` and `overloaded strings`); I am partial to this option _because_ the approach is battle tested. However, I am convinced by the flexibility that O2 provides due to the existential on the builder. If I recall correctly we disallow deriving data types with existentials. So does this mean that O2 precludes the ability to say:
```
{-# LANGUAGE GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving #-}

import Data.String (IsString)

newtype Username = Username String
  deriving (Show, IsString, IsInterpolatedString)  
```
I can imagine instances where I would want to write something such as that.

## Result Options
The tension in these design choices boils down choosing how this proposal interplays with `OverloadedStrings` and _if it is desirable_ to _continue_ to follow the design of overloaded strings or if we should begin to prefer something `QualifiedStrings`. I think answering that question is tantemount to choosing an option here. My feelings are that as a community, and a culture, we tend to prefer improved designs that yield breaking changes rather than backwards compatibility. For example, the burning bridges proposal and the no `/=` in Eq proposal (even though these have caused [friction](https://discourse.haskell.org/t/learning-from-the-no-in-eq-debate/3651/22?page=2)). Now for the purposes of this proposal there is no backward compatability concern. But I am moved by the consistency concern between strings and number literals. Regarding the overloading of number literals. Doesn't `RebindableSyntax` play a role here? I thought that `2` desugars to `Prelude.fromIntegral (2 :: Integer)`? If that is so then I think R2 makes the most sense. Without `RebindableSyntax` `s"foo"` would desugar to `Prelude.convert ...` and with it `s"foo" would desugar to a user provided `convert ...`. 

## Convert Options
I'm attracted by the simplicity of C1 and the user story, e.g., I can just derive Show to get my builder. Conceptually that makes a lot of sense: I want my type to be interpolated, interpolation is really just a function from my type to a string, which is exactly `Show`. C2 subsumes C1 at the cost of adding many instances. So I view C1 as a faster and more conservative approach. If we find that C1 is too restrictive or too costly (we cannot fuse the `String`s for example) then I think we could always grow into C2.

Author: @simonpj Your comment needs some cleaning up. You mention a nonexistent option B1, when you probably mean R1, and you say "R3 is like R3" instead of "R3 is like R2". Also, didn't we agree that the Builder type is useful for the discussion, but not for actually being proposed? Or can we add the uncurried version as an option?

Also, your options use the Show typeclass, but I intentionally proposed a new `Interpolate` class in the proposal. I strongly prefer avoiding the current Show class, since the two have different semantics (Show is intended to return the value as syntactically valid Haskell expression; Show HashMap returns `fromList [(k, v), ...]`, but interpolating a HashMap might want to render as `{k: v, ...}`). Was that only for illustration purposes, or did you actually intend Show?

But for my preferences:
* Weakly prefer O2b (curried lambda) over O2 (lambda with Builder), weakly prefer both to O1. 
    * O2b has only one rebindable name, O2 has two (Builder type + `stringBuilder` implementation of the Builder), O1 has 5.
    * Record data types are still one of Haskell's biggest issues, and I'd prefer not relying on record data types in a language extension. But still better than 5 rebindable functions
* Weakly prefer R3 over R2, strongly prefer both over R1
    * I like the simplicity of R3/R2 saying "we'll provide a hardcoded implementation, do anything different in qualified", vs R1 having two ways to provide a custom interpolator.
    * I could see the benefit of R2, only providing String, and forcing qualified strings for any non-String. That would completely divorce StringInterpolation from OverloadedStrings, which I'm not totally opposed to
* Strongly prefer C1 over C2
    * IIUC C2 only makes sense with R1. C2 doesn't make sense when R2/R3 always go via String in the built-in implementation, and qualified interpolators don't have to use any of this infrastructure. So the rest of the comments assume R1
    * C1 lets you interpolate into Text/ByteString/etc. for free. C2 would require adding new instances for all NxM pairs

@doyougnu See my comments above. If it makes a difference, it would be a new `Interpolate` class, not reuse `Show`, and the lambda approach doesn't require a Builder data type.

Reviewer 24: From the discussion so far, I am partial to O1, R1, and C1. It matches most closely what I would "expect" from interpolated strings. I'll ruminate on this for a bit and try to give more informative feedback soon.

Reviewer 22: > Your comment needs some cleaning up.

Thank you.  I have done that. 

I have added an explicit (O3) for the curried version.

I have made explicit (under Binding Options) what happens in the qualified `M.s"..` form.

> Record data types are still one of Haskell's biggest issues

Data constructors with named fields have been in Haskell since birth, and are utterly stable. That's all we are using here.  I have made that more explicit.

Reviewer 3: I think we need to drastically cut down on the dimensions of the design space ASAP.

Brandon's suggestion to get rid of the dependency to `-XOverloadedStrings` (`-XOS`) strongly resonates with me. 

After we've done that, "Convert options" collapses to (C1), and `convert = interpolate` where `interpolate :: a -> String`. (*Maybe* `interpolate :: a -> ShowS`. Separate discussion.) 

In this view, `-XStringInterpolation` is not like `-XOS` *at all*, because what would we overload? Overloading the `String` result type is done by `-XOS`. There is no other type worth overloading. This has consequences for the Result options axis: (R3) doesn't make sense (it's governed by `-XOS`). (R1) would allow for overriding `finalise`, `raw`, `convert`, `append` and `empty`, but I absolutely do not see a use case for `String` that isn't better served by qualified string interpolation. Until we have one, I suggest we stick to (R2).

That leaves the Binding options axis. I prefer (O1), as do all the other members of the committee that voiced their opinion so far. I'm not sold by "5 new top-level names" because we can define them in a module that is never intended to be imported unqualified.

Author: @sgraf812 Just to be clear, the current proposal is R3. You're suggesting R2, which means that `s"..."` will only ever be String unless you use qualified string interpolation? So in effect, only qualified string interpolation would be used in practice, since most people arent using String in their programs?

Reviewer 3: Indeed. Let's see what the ecosystem will do; if there is need for an overloaded variant, we know what to do (propose the type class).

Reviewer 13: I'm not sure how seriously I take this idea, but... what about offering *only* qualified string interpolation, at least at first? Then if/when we decide to settle on a default, we can offer that as the unqualified.

Author: That's not a terrible idea. What do others think?

Author: @ChickenProp Actually, I'm not sure if there would actually be a benefit to only offering qualified. Even if we only offer qualified, I would argue we should still provide a canonical `class Interpolate a where interpolate :: a -> String` class; otherwise, `text`, `bytestring`, etc. would all have to implement their own `Interpolate` classes, and you run into orphan instance problems again.

And even if we choose to only offer qualified, we still need to decide on the desugaring. whether it's `M.interpolateString $ ...` or `M.finalize $ M.convert ...` or whatever.

Once we provide a canonical `Interpolate` class and define the desugaring, there's really only one meaningful default implementation: building a `String`, or optionally lifting it with `fromString`.

Reviewer 18: > I would argue we should still provide a canonical class Interpolate a where interpolate :: a -> String class; otherwise, text, bytestring, etc. would all have to implement their own Interpolate classes, and you run into orphan instance problems again.

@brandonchinn178 Did you not suggest that `text` and `bytestring` not to reuse the `Interpolate` class, because doing so would go through `String`, which is something to avoid if we care about performance? Of course, the `Interpolate` class could be reused if it is also parametrised by the string type `s`, but I recall you argued against this in previous comments?

Author: I've never said that. What I might have said is that text or bytestring are free to implement their own if they have performance concerns, but I've never said they ought to

Reviewer 18: I apologise for my misunderstanding, but I do think that `text` and `bytestring` should provide their own interpolation class (to go through `Builder`s instead of `String`s), if the built-in `Interpolate` class is not polymorphic over the string type. Otherwise people are penalised whenever they use string interpolations for `Text` or `ByteString`, and both libraries already provide the rich `Builder` API specifically to avoid going through strings.

Author: text/bytestring are free to do so; nothing in this proposal is forcing them to do anything. However, IMO the "performance penalty" is overblown; no one should seriously be using string interpolation in performance sensitive code. I highly doubt that going to Text via String will meaningfully slow down typical scenarios using string interpolation.

text/bytestring could even provide multiple string interpolator modules, one using the built-in Interpolate for convenience, and one using a new TextInterpolate class going straight to Text.Builder.

Reviewer 18: Personally I do not buy this argument. If going through `String` is not a big deal for performance, then I feel that the same logic applies to `Text` and `ByteString` themselves, i.e., one should not bother to interpolate to `Text` or `ByteString` at all, and one should be satisfied with `pack`ing the interpolated `String` in the end.

If string interpolation for `Text` has worse performance than manual text building, then we would have to draw the conclusion that `String`s are just better supported by this language feature, and `String` is "the blessed string type". I feel that this is against the current community consensus (to steer away from `String` usage).

Author: > `String`s are just better supported by this language feature, and `String` is "the blessed string type"

I mean, yes. `String` is blessed in the language report and the compiler, so it's necessarily blessed in any text-related language feature. Even though people ought to steer away from `String`, you can't really design a language feature around a string type that's not provided by the language

Reviewer 18: > you can't really design a language feature around a string type that's not provided by the language

The point is, we can (e.g., consider option R1 above), right? I feel that `text` and `bytestring` are the de facto standard for Haskell string processing, and we should really take them into account when designing language features, despite that the Haskell Report does not mention them.

IMO, Haskell is famous for providing abstractions that support user constructions as first-class citizens. The `do`-notation is not limited to only the language built-in monads, and we are able to write parsers using `do`, even though the `Parsec` monad was never mentioned in the Report.

If I have not made this clear, I am all for this proposal, I am grateful to your efforts, and I am looking forward to using native string interpolations to replace my custom `QuasiQuotes`-based solution. I just think that `text` and `bytestring` deserves more attention here, and specifically the `Interpolate` mechanism should be designed with the two packages in mind (to avoid ecosystem fragmentation etc.). As a design goal, string interpolations should expand to something as good as manually written code.

Author: Yeah, sure, that's fair. However, what's the point of R1 when we have qualified string interpolation? Just to avoid the `T.` prefix? Qualified string interpolation _is_ the "abstraction that supports user constructions as first-class citizens". Why does the built-in `s"..."` syntax need to be?

Reviewer 18: Allow me to refer back to my original comment. I think my point was about the `Interpolate` class.

My question was, should the built-in `Interpolate` class hard-code `String`, or can we come up with a better solution?

Here is my concern: hard-coding `String` results in an awkward situation. Either (a) `text` lives with it, and string interpolations for `Text` is inferior to manually written code (though you argued that the performance penalty is overblown), or (b) `text` provides its own `Interpolate` class, which risks fragmenting the ecosystem (and you mentioned that there might be the orphan instance issue).

Specifically, I thought that R1+C2 might be a sweet spot, with full built-in support for `text` and `bytestring`, and `Data.Text` could just reexport the standard interpolate function with a monomorphised type.

Author: Yes, your analysis is correct. There is no good answer here.

* Option C1 - `class Interpolate a where interpolate :: a -> String`
    * ⛔ Interpolators built on top of this must interpolate via String
    * 👍 String types (e.g. `Text`) don't need to define their own interpolations
    * 👍 User types (e.g. `URL`) only define interpolation once
* Option C2 - `class Interpolate a s where interpolate :: a -> s`
    * 👍 Interpolators can interpolate directly + more performantly
    * ⛔ String types (e.g. `Text`) must define an instance for each user type
    * ⛔ User types (e.g. `URL`) must define an instance for each string type
    * ⛔ Diamond / orphan instances problem (who should define `instance Interpolate URL MyText`?)

I disagree that C2 is a sweet spot. It just optimizes for different things.

To go back to _my_ point, **C1 vs C2 is only a debate over the default `s"..."` syntax**. The reason I think C1 is superior is because **C2 is already possible with qualified syntax**. Forget the default `s"..."` syntax for a second. If we only provide `Interpolate a`, `text` can still provide two modules:

* `Data.Text.Interpolate1.s"..."` - Interpolate via `GHC.Interpolate a`
* `Data.Text.Interpolate2.s"..."` - Interpolate via `Data.Text.Interpolate a`, where `Data.Text.Interpolate a` includes `convert :: a -> Text` (or `a -> Text.Builder`)

Going with C1 simply provides a nucleation point for interpolation, and doesn't preclude C2. Note that there's no difference between `Interpolate a s` and `String.Interpolate a`/`Text.Interpolate a`/`BS.Interpolate a`/etc. The only reason to push for `Interpolate a s` is: 1) you want `s"..."` to work for different types, AND 2) you want `s"..."` to have performant interpolations. My position is that qualified string interpolations can do this (and more), so there's no reason to add this functionality to `s"..."`, especially at the cost of adding a multi param type class to compiler internals.

---

Let's pause this discussion for now, because I'm pushing a revised proposal as we speak

Reviewer: I haven't read the changes yet, but I have some minor alternatives to R1 (or perhaps confusion) and C1/C2 to suggest for the wired in version.

For R1 you have
```Haskell
class IsInterpolatedString s b where
   finalise :: b -> s
   append :: b -> b -> b
   empty :: b
   …
```

but why not have b(uilder) be a type family on s(tring type) and assume monoid here for empty/append? Or | s -> b?
I don't think re-using the same builder between multiple string types is important (unless this is common for strict/lazy text builders?), and you can do so via NxM C2 assuming different string types anyway.
The builder doesn't have to be the same as the library's API's builder (though it can be) if monoid is a problem, it can be a newtype. 
I can't think why it would be other than "it has a different monoid instance than the one desired for interpolation".

If not isn't this another type variable to be ambiguous about?

...

There's another option between C1 and C2, which is to have C1 (or Show) provide an overlappable instance C1, IsString => C2 as the wired-in interpolate.
This lets you opt into NxM performance at the cost of overlapping instances. But then you would have to put an OVERLAPPING pragma on every single C2 instance you did choose to write.

Author: See the updated proposal; at the bottom, there's an alternative discussed around `type Builder`

You're right, there's another option to implement `Show a => Interpolate a` and have everything else be overlapping. However, IIRC there's no OVERLAPPABLE instances in base right now, and I imagine people wouldn't be happy about adding one for this

Reviewer: The builder stuff in the proposal makes sense to me, though I still think you should just assume monoid instead of append and empty for the wired-in. The only extra cost I can see is empty must be an identity for append.

I agree overlapping instances in base would be controversial but I think it would be added if the situation called for it so I thought it was worth mentioning. It does come with the downside that you may need a second interpolate class for String though to avoid recursion.

Reviewer: Based on @ruifengx's comment outside of this thread it seems like a better alternative to the overlapping instance is to assume interpolate is akin to `raw (show …)` i.e. things like data constructors become part of an interpolated literal like `s"Just ${x}"` and have

```Haskell
-- string-like types
instance (Show a) => Interpolate [a] s
-- showList, but this is undesirable for a != Char, so perhaps this needs overlapping instances, or something like convertList?
-- (More unfortunate fallout of String = [Char])
instance Interpolate Text s -- via String
-- the above two can utilise rewrite rules (e.g. Interpolate Text Text)

-- primitive types do need overlap OR MxN (or maybe rewrite rules?)
instance {-# OVERLAPPABLE #-} Interpolate Int s -- via String
instance {-# OVERLAPPING #-} Interpolate Int Text -- e.g. more efficient user version
-- OR
instance Interpolate Int String
instance Interpolate Int Text

-- algebraic datatypes: Constructors use raw e.g. Just a -> s"Just ${a}"
instance Interpolate a s => Interpolate (Maybe a) s
```

So almost every instance is generic on interpolation type anyway, avoiding MxN and not (or rarely) using overlap. 

**Ignore this whole paragraph, precedence is already in the proposal.**
One thing I'm not sure about here though is precedence, really for the nested x in Just {x} you want to show it at a higher precedence or parenthesised. Unless the wired-in Interpolate had a parameter for it because it's show-like. ~~Or perhaps the builder should be a newtype on `Int -> ShowS`~~ only works for string

Reviewer: Also this approach begs the question of why have s in every instance? If the re-write rules suffice you could take an approach similar to String but instead generic on IsInterpolatedString:
```Haskell
class Interpolate a where
   ...
   interpolateS :: Interpolable s  => Int -> a -> Builder s
```

Author: I don't understand; if you don't have `s`, how do you define `Interpolate` for primitives like `Int`?
```hs
instance Interpolate Int where
  interpolateS :: forall s. Interpolable s => Int -> Int -> Builder s
  interpolateS _ x = _ -- ??
```

Reviewer: Via String and raw, depending on rewrite rules for optimisation. So I'm not sure it's necessarily better than the two parameter class, but if the rules fired consistently it could be.

Author: Okay, now I understand what you're saying. But I don't see the benefit of that; with the current `interpolate :: a -> String` class, `Text` could already write an interpolator where `interpolateValue = fromString . interpolate`. Your suggestion would still be going through String, the only difference is that the `fromString` would be inside `interpolate`. If we always specified `{-# INLINE #-}` on `interpolate`, it should be equivalent

Author: Oh I think I see, you're arguing that if we keep it polymorphic, composite types could keep it in `s` without having to unlift to String and lift back to String. Which could solve @maralorn's point about `Builder`. Let me try that out

Reviewer 18: I am slightly worried about relying on `REWRITE` rules (again) to optimise for e.g., interpolating `Int` into a `T.Builder`. Are we confident that the rules will reliably fire? Besides, if there are true polymorphic use of `interpolateS`, they certainly could not benefit from the `REWRITE` rules, but they might benefit from a specialised instance if the `Interpolate` class has the `s` parameter. Otherwise, I like this proposal; it is definitely better than hard-coding `String`s.

Author: Yes, see my latest update. Thanks @Jashweii! I'm going to close this thread as we've progressed in the discussion past this point, but feel free to start a new thread!

If Haskell had native string interpolation, it would have the benefit and safety of the current third-party quasiquotes without the need for Template Haskell, and be able to take advantage of features like `multiline strings <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/569>`_.
::

  error s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

  let textExample = s"${name1} (age: ${age1}) encountered ${name2} (age: ${age2})"

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

This proposal introduces the ``-XStringInterpolation`` extension, which enables ``s"Name: ${name}"`` syntax. It synergizes well with ``-XOverloadedStrings``, ``-XMultilineStrings``, and ``-XQualifiedStrings``.

High-level Overview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At its core, this proposal proposes the following functionality:

> * The syntax ``s"age: ${age}"`` expands to a built-in implementation using a new ``Interpolate`` type class with an ``interpolate :: a -> String`` function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The syntax ``s"age: ${age}"`` expands to a built-in implementation using a new ``Interpolate`` type class to interpolate values such as ``age``.
```

Expansion
~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  interpolateFinalize $
    interpolateRaw "foo "   `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue (f a b)`interpolateAppend`
    interpolateRaw " bar "  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue (g x)  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateRaw " baz "  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue name   `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateEmpty

Namely:

* An ``istringRaw`` component expands to ``interpolateRaw "<istringRaw>"``

  * The string literal passed to ``interpolateRaw`` is a strict ``String`` literal, unaffected by ``-XOverloadedStrings``

* An ``istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose`` component expands to ``interpolateValue (<exp>)``

* The list of ``istring`` components between ``istringBegin`` and ``istringEnd`` expands to the expansion of the components, with ``interpolateAppend`` as "list cons" and ``interpolateEmpty`` as "list nil".

  * ``interpolateAppend`` is always right-associative

>   * Related: *Section 4.1 OverloadedStrings* and *Section 4.2 QualifiedStrings*

Reviewer 3: Outdated section numbers. Use proper links

``ghc-experimental`` modules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This proposal would be adding the following modules to ``ghc-experimental``, which would potentially be promoted to a proper library like ``base`` once the feature is stablized.

.. list-table::
    :align: left

    * - **Module**
      - **Details**
    * - ``Data.String.Experimental``

>       - Re-exports ``Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental``

Reviewer 3: I think you want to export `Data.String.Interpolate.Default.Experimental` also, at the very least. Otherwise the expansion contains unbound function calls.

Reviewer 3: Or maybe you mean to expand to `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`? What is the purpose of `Data.String.Experimental`, then?

This feels quite over-engineered, TBH.

Author: I can remove `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental` and just use `Data.String.Experimental`. I personally don't like when a module `M.N.P` exists but `M.N` doesn't, but that's fine.

`Data.String.Experimental` should probably remain the entrypoint because the goal is for `Data.String` to be the entrypoint when this merges with `base`

        , sqlValues = [SqlText "A%"]
        }

The library could also define an implementation to support failure states:

::

  module Data.SQL.Compile.Interpolate (
    module X,
    interpolateFinalize,
  ) where

  import Data.SQL.Interpolate as X hiding (interpolateFinalize)

  interpolateFinalize :: SqlQuery -> Either ParseError CompiledSqlQuery
  interpolateFinalize = compileQuery

::

  import Data.SQL.Compile.Interpolate qualified as SQL

  main = do
    let name = "Alice"
    query <-
      either (fail . show) pure $
        SQL.s"SELECT * FROM users WHERE name = ${name}"

    print query

Custom interpolator: HTML
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Imagine a library implements a new ``Html`` type like:

::

  newtype Html = Html Text
    deriving newtype (Show, IsString, Semigroup, Monoid)

  escapeHtml :: Text -> Text
  escapeHtml = Text.replace "<" "&lt;" . Text.replace ">" "&gt;"

  newtype RawHtml = RawHtml {unRawHtml :: Text}

  raw :: Text -> RawHtml
  raw = RawHtml

That library could define the module:

::

  module Data.HTML.Interpolate where

  import Data.HTML as HTML
  import Data.String.Experimental qualified as S

>   interpolateRaw = HTML.raw

Reviewer 3: `interpolateRaw` must accept `String`, no? Then this doesn't type-check because `HTML.raw` wants `Text`.

  interpolateValue = interpolate
  interpolateAppend = mappend
  interpolateEmpty = mempty
  interpolateFinalize = id

  class Interpolate a where

>     interpolate :: a -> Html

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't this return `RawHtml`? Otherwise `interpolateValue` has a different return type than `interpolateRaw`.

Add ``istring*`` patterns to ``lexeme`` (not ``literal``, because they're not literals):

.. code-block:: abnf

  lexeme  → qvarid | qconid | qvarsym | qconsym
          | literal | special | reservedop | reservedid
          | istringBegin
          | istringRaw
          | istringExprOpen
          | istringExprClose
          | istringEnd
          | istringMultilineBegin
          | istringMultilineRawStartLine
          | istringMultilineRawMidLine
          | istringMultilineEnd

  istringBegin → 's"' | modid . 's"'
  istringRaw → {graphic⟨'\' | '"' | '${'⟩ | space | escape | gap}
  istringExprOpen → '${'
  istringExprClose → '}'
  istringEnd → '"'

  istringMultilineBegin → 's"""' | modid . 's"""'
  istringMultilineRawStartLine → {whitechar} istringMultilineRawMidLine
  istringMultilineRawMidLine → {graphic⟨'\' | '"""' | '${'⟩ | space | escape | gap}
  istringMultilineEnd → '"""'

Also add ``$`` to ``charesc``:

.. code-block:: abnf

  charesc → a | b | f | n | r | t | v | \ | " | ' | & | $

With ``$`` added to ``charesc``, interpolation can be avoided by escaping the dollar sign; e.g. ``s"\${foo}" == "${foo}"``.

> This grammar enables interpolating expressions with nested braces. Concretely, ``istringExprOpen`` and ``istringExprClose`` are only lexed within the ``istring`` context, using Alex start codes. See *Section 3.1* for examples.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This grammar enables interpolating expressions with nested braces. Concretely, ``istringExprOpen`` and ``istringExprClose`` are only lexed within the ``istring`` and ``istringMultiline`` grammar productions, using Alex start codes. See *Section 3.1* for examples.
```

.. code-block:: abnf

  aexp → qvar
       | ...
       | istring
       | istringMultiline

  istring →
    istringBegin
      {istringRaw | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose}
      istringEnd

  istringMultiline →
    istringMultilineBegin
      {istringMultilineRawStartLine | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose istringMultilineRawMidLine}
      istringMultilineEnd

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Experimental``. After the API has stablized, these might eventually live in ``base`` under ``Data.String``, alongside ``IsString``.

::

  {----- Implementation of s"..." -----}

  interpolateRaw :: String -> StringBuilder
  interpolateRaw = fromString

  interpolateValue :: Interpolate a => a -> StringBuilder
  interpolateValue = interpolate

  interpolateAppend :: StringBuilder -> StringBuilder -> StringBuilder
  interpolateAppend = mappend
  infixr 6 `interpolateAppend` -- matches (<>)

  interpolateEmpty :: StringBuilder
  interpolateEmpty = mempty

  interpolateFinalize :: StringBuilder -> String
  interpolateFinalize = buildString

  {----- StringBuilder -----}

>   newtype StringBuilder = StringBuilder (Endo String)

Reviewer 3: I'll leave it to the CLC to deliberate whether we want a new type rather than just reuse `ShowS` here

Author: I'm not sure why CLC would care, this is an implementation detail.

I was trying to avoid any connection to Show. If ShowS were named differently, I'd use it.

Reviewer 3: Fair point.

Author: Oh also, I need a new type because `ShowS` doesn't have IsString/Monoid instances

    deriving newtype (Semigroup, Monoid)
  instance IsString StringBuilder where
    fromString s = StringBuilder (Endo (s <>))

  buildString :: StringBuilder -> String
  buildString (StringBuilder (Endo f)) = f ""

  {----- Interpolation of values -----}

  class Interpolate a where

>     interpolate :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s

Reviewer 3: Are we sure the generalization to `Monoid s` instead of just `StringBuilder` pays off? I don't understand how example 3.2 argues that it does. So either use `StringBuilder` here or improve 3.2. Maybe the argument is to use `Interpolate` outside of string interpolations? Then the example should name the `s` that is different to `StringBuilder`.

Reviewer 3: Ah, 2.8 gives motivation: you want to be able to specialize `interpolate` to a different builder for custom qualified interpolators. This gives those interpolators a higher change to specialize `(<>)` appropriately.

I suggest you kill 3.2 (unless you improve the argument) and then mention the specialization opportunity?

Author: I don't understand why 3.2 has to go away. The point is to show an example of an `Interpolate` instance that only relies on IsString, Monoid, and other Interpolate instances. It sounds like I should just mention specialization in 3.2?

Reviewer 3: Maybe? Honestly, I don't get the point of 3.2. It is an instance of `Interpolate`. It would type-check both for `interpolate :: a -> StringBuilder` and `interpolate :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s`. But why is it an argument in favour of the latter? It says

> If it were monomorphized to String, instances that would only use fromString and <> would make unnecessary roundtrips through String.

This *might* have been an argument back when `interpolate :: a -> String`, but now with `StringBuilder` it isn't. *Maybe* if you said "would make unnecessary roundtrips through StringBuilder". But then I still don't know what the supposedly better alternative is.

Author: So the default interpolator would always ever use this as `s ~ StringBuilder`. For all intents and purposes, it's essentially equivalent to specifying `interpolate :: a -> String`. But the advantage comes from **qualified interpolators being able to reuse the built-in Interpolate class**. Imagine `text` writing the following module:

```hs
interpolateRaw = fromString :: String -> T.Builder
interpolateValue = interpolate :: Interpolate a => a -> T.Builder
interpolateFinalize = T.toLazyText
```

In 3.2, interpolateValue would interpolate file/line/col via String, but SrcLoc would merge them using only fromString and mappend, keeping things in T.Builder. If interpolate were `a -> String`, SrcLoc would have to build the entire thing as String and only lift it at the end. I'd imagine this would add up to some perf savings

Reviewer 3: > But the advantage comes from qualified interpolators being able to reuse the built-in Interpolate class.

Ah, thanks. This was the key insight I was missing! It hasn't much to do with being able to write performant compositional `StringBuilder`s; it's ultimately about re-using existing interpolators in a different builder context. That makes a lot of sense to me. Could you adjust your explanation, then?

Author: Done!

  instance Interpolate String where
    interpolate = fromString
  instance Interpolate Char where
    interpolate c = fromString [c]

  instance Interpolate Int where
    interpolate = fromString . show
  instance Interpolate Double where
    interpolate = fromString . show
  instance Interpolate Bool where
    interpolate = fromString . show

Types may implement ``Interpolate`` using ``IsString`` or ``Monoid``; see *Section 3.2 Composite types* for an example.

Expansion
~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  interpolateFinalize $
    interpolateRaw "foo "   `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue (f a b)`interpolateAppend`
    interpolateRaw " bar "  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue (g x)  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateRaw " baz "  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue name   `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateEmpty

Namely:

> * An ``istringRaw <str>`` component expands to ``interpolateRaw "<str>"``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* An ``istringRaw`` component expands to ``interpolateRaw "<istringRaw>"``
```

.. list-table::
    :align: left

    * - **Module**
      - **Details**
    * - ``Data.String.Experimental``
      - Re-exports ``Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental``
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental``
      - Re-exports ``Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental`` and ``Data.String.Interpolate.Default.Experimental``
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental``
      - Defines the ``Interpolate`` class and instances as written in *Section 2.4 Machinery*
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Default.Experimental``
      - Defines the classes and functions for the default ``s"..."`` syntax, as written in *Section 2.4 Machinery*
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Explicit.Experimental``
      - Defines an interpolator that's the same as the default except interpolates values directly without automatic conversion with ``Interpolate`` (See *Section 10.3 Provided interpolator: Explicit*)
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.ShowS.Experimental``
      - Defines an interpolator useful for implementing ``showsPrec`` (See *Section 10.4 Provided interpolator: ShowS*)

OverloadedStrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, a final ``fromString`` is added after the ``interpolateFinalize`` call. This still constructs the string with ``ShowS`` -> ``String``, so users might prefer using QualifiedStrings instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, a final ``fromString`` is added after the ``interpolateFinalize`` call. This still constructs the string with ``StringBuilder`` -> ``String``, so users might prefer using QualifiedStrings instead.
```

QualifiedStrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When ``-XQualifiedStrings`` is enabled, you may qualify string interpolation, where ``[modid.]s"..."`` desugars to the same expressions, except resolving the ``interpolate*`` functions as ``[modid.]interpolate*``. Some examples:

::

  Text.s"hello world"

  -- Desugars to:
  Text.interpolateFinalize $
    Text.interpolateRaw "hello world"

::

  SQL.s"select * from users where name = ${Text.toUpper name} and age = ${age}"

  -- Desugars to:
  SQL.interpolateFinalize $
    SQL.interpolateRaw   "select * from users where name = " `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateValue (Text.toUpper name)                 `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateRaw   " and age = "                       `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateValue age                                 `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateEmpty

When ``-XQualifiedStrings`` is enabled, ``@String`` is *not* included.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> ``interpolateAppend`` will be right-associative by default, but this can be changed if ``interpolateAppend`` is marked ``infixl``.

Reviewer 3: Do you foresee users of this feature? I'm having a hard time doing so.

Author: Oh actually this is wrong, I should change this. You will have to specify the associativity every time, it wont default to right associative.

I can't think of any use-case myself, but I don't see a reason to not hardcode the associativity, unless you'd like to avoid needing to annotate the fixity every time?

Reviewer 3: It doesn't seem like the most important thing to make extensible? I'd weakly prefer fixing it to right association. If people want left association they can write an eta-expanded Builder thing like `Endo` (like in the trick that encodes `foldl` in terms of `foldr`).

Delimiter-related Alternatives
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Allow ``$foo`` in addition to ``${foo}``

  * This would complicate the syntax, and would also require interpolated string to escape bare ``$``.

* Different quote delimiter

  * ``s"..."`` was taken from Scala's interpolation syntax
  * Could use ``f"..."`` like Python, with ``f`` for format, but ``f`` is a common variable name for functions and if the user forgets to enable ``-XStringInterpolation``, ``f"..."`` would parse as ``f "..."`` which is likely to be valid.
  * Could use ``i"..."``, with ``i`` for interpolate.
  * Could reuse QuasiQuote syntax, e.g. ``[s|`` or ``[fmt|``, except it would be special and NOT use Template Haskell.
  * Could do ``''...''``, since ``''`` is invalid Haskell syntax today. However, code highlighters that aren't updated for ``-XStringInterpolation`` yet would not gracefully handle this.

* No quote delimiter, always interpolate

  * Would require any use of ``${...}`` to be escaped.
  * No other language does this; even Bash has single quoted strings to avoid escaping

* Different interpolation delimiter, e.g. ``#{foo}``

>   * ``${`` is familiar to most developers

Reviewer 25: There is a quite clean solution which [jq uses](https://jqlang.org/manual/#string-interpolation).

Using `\(` and `)` as delimiters. This allows dropping the `s` prefix without breaking existing programs when `-XStringInterpolation` is used, since currently a lexical error is raised.

For non compliant instances, e.g. if `interpolate` and `fromString` differ, there could still be some breakage.

We probably want to then use either interpolation always or interpolation iff an escape sequence appears in the string.

Reviewer: > There is a quite clean solution which [jq uses](https://jqlang.org/manual/#string-interpolation).
> 
> Using `\(` and `)` as delimiters. This allows dropping the `s` prefix without breaking existing programs when `-XStringInterpolation` is used, since currently a lexical error is raised.

It seems like swift also uses `\(` without a prefix.
https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/stringsandcharacters/#String-Interpolation
Java uses `\{` but still has a prefix. (You can see the example without accepting cookies)
https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/language/string-templates.html

> For non compliant instances, e.g. if `interpolate` and `fromString` differ, there could still be some breakage.
> 
> We probably want to then use either interpolation always or interpolation iff an escape sequence appears in the string.

As the proposal currently stands it could only differ for the qualified or `-XRebindableSyntax` version if the module implemented `fromString s` ≠ ``interpolateFinalize (interpolateRaw s `interpolateAppend` interpolateEmpty)``). The previous version that I prefer required an additional instance for the `IsString` type [unless it had the iff behaviour you mention].

Author: @jokesper Good point! I still think it's not a good idea, as you'd have to parse the string before figuring out how to parse it (both as a human, and for the compiler). But I updated the alternative discussing having no quote delimiter at all

Reviewer 25: > as you'd have to parse the string before figuring out how to [desuger] it

Isn't this also the case for a lot of other things: List comprehension vs List literals TupleSections vs tuple constructor, ...?
Personally I think this is only really relevant in combination with long multiline strings but even then I'm on edge.

Still. Thanks you for considering

Author: Sure, that's fair. It's a fair alternative, and if a critical mass of people wanted this, we could discuss deeper. But IMO string literals are more atomic than list/tuple syntax, so I think that in this particular case, the syntactic ambiguity is not worth any ergonomic improvement here

.. contents::

Most languages have support for interpolating variables and (usually) arbitrary expressions:

* Python

  .. code-block:: python

    f"Expected: {x + y}, got: {result}"

* Rust

  .. code-block:: rust

    format!("Expected: {sum}, got: {result}")

* Scala

  .. code-block:: scala

    s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

* Javascript/Typescript

  .. code-block:: javascript

    `Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}`

This proposal proposes adding S-strings (like Scala's syntax) to Haskell.

Motivation
----------

Most non-trivial projects build strings at some point: printing out logs, rendering exceptions, generating code, pretty-printing. There are currently multiple ways to do this:
::

  -- concatenation + show
  error $ "Expected: " <> show (x + y) <> ", got: " <> show result

  -- printf
  error $ printf "Expected: %d, got: %d" (x + y) result

  -- safer printf, e.g. the `formatting` package
  error $ format ("Expected: " % int % ", got: " % int) (x + y) result

  -- quasiquoters, e.g. `string-interpolate` using `haskell-src-exts`
  error [i|Expected: #{x + y}, got: #{result}|]

  -- find-and-replace
  error $
    Text.replace "${x + y}" (show $ x + y) $

>     Text.replace "${result}" (show result) $

Reviewer 3: `show` provides `String`, not `Text`... so you need to `T.pack` or `T.show`.

>     "Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    "Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"
```

    :align: left

    * - ``s"a ${} b"``
      - Expression is missing
    * - ``s"a ${=} b"``
      - Not a valid expression
    * - ``s"a ${let x =} b"``
      - Incomplete expression
    * - ``s"a ${{b} c"``
      - The second ``{`` is not a valid character to start an expression
    * - ``s"a ${b -- asdf} c"``
      - The rest of the string is commented out

Composite types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``Interpolate`` specifies a generic ``IsString s, Monoid s``, which allows composite types to stay within ``s``. If it were monomorphized to ``String``, instances that would only use ``fromString`` and ``<>`` would make unnecessary roundtrips through ``String``.

::

    data SrcLoc = SrcLoc
      { file :: FilePath
      , line :: Int
      , col :: Int
      }

    instance Interpolate SrcLoc where
      interpolate SrcLoc{..} =
        interpolate file <>
        fromString ":" <>
        interpolate line <>
        fromString ":" <>
        interpolate col

The ``Basic`` interpolator would be useful here, to reuse string interpolation syntax (`Section 10.3 Provided interpolator: Basic <#103provided-interpolator-basic>`_):

::

    instance Interpolate SrcLoc where

>       interpolate SrcLoc{..} = Basic.s"${file}:${line}:${col}"

Reviewer 3: The `Basic` interpolator does no automatic interpolation. Maybe you mean to add 3 more `interpolate`s here, but I can't quite map it out. The default monomorphises to `String` so it's not usable here...

    conjoin cs = mconcat $ intersperse " AND " (cs :: [SqlQuery])

  SQL.s"SELECT * FROM tab WHERE ${conjoin whereClauses}"
    == SqlQuery
        { sqlText = "SELECT * FROM tab WHERE age > 18 AND name ILIKE ?"
        , sqlValues = [SqlText "A%"]
        }

The library could also define an implementation to support failure states:

::

  module Data.SQL.Compile.Interpolate (
    module X,
    interpolateFinalize,
  ) where

  import Data.SQL.Interpolate as X hiding (interpolateFinalize)

  interpolateFinalize :: SqlQuery -> Either ParseError CompiledSqlQuery
  interpolateFinalize = compileQuery

::

  import Data.SQL.Compile.Interpolate qualified as SQL

  main = do
    let name = "Alice"
    query <-
      either (fail . show) pure $
        SQL.s"SELECT * FROM users WHERE name = ${name}"

    print query

Custom interpolator: HTML
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Imagine a library implements a new ``Html`` type like:

::

  newtype Html = Html Text
    deriving newtype (Show, IsString, Semigroup, Monoid)

  escapeHtml :: Text -> Text
  escapeHtml = Text.replace "<" "&lt;" . Text.replace ">" "&gt;"

That library could define the module:

::

  module Data.HTML.Interpolate where

>   import Data.HTML as HTML

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  import Data.HTML as Html
```

This grammar enables interpolating expressions with nested braces. Concretely, ``istringExprOpen`` and ``istringExprClose`` are only lexed within the ``istring`` context, using Alex start codes. See *Section 3.1* for examples.

Context-Free Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Update `Section 10.5 <https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/haskell2010/haskellch10.html#x17-18000010.5>`_ of the Haskell 2010 report as follows.

.. code-block:: abnf

  aexp → qvar
       | ...
       | istring
       | istringMultiline

  istring →
    istringBegin
      {istringRaw | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose}
      istringEnd

  istringMultiline →
    istringMultilineBegin
      {istringMultilineRawStartLine | istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose istringMultilineRawMidLine}
      istringMultilineEnd

Machinery
~~~~~~~~~

The following code will live in ``ghc-experimental`` under ``Data.String.Experimental``. After the API has stablized, these might eventually live in ``base`` under ``Data.String``, alongside ``IsString``.

::

  {----- Implementation of s"..." -----}

  interpolateRaw :: IsString s => String -> s
  interpolateRaw = fromString

>   interpolateValue :: (Interpolate a, IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  interpolateValue :: (Interpolate a, InterpolatorBuilder s) => a -> s
```

  interpolateValue = interpolate

  interpolateAppend :: Monoid s => s -> s -> s
  interpolateAppend = mappend

>   infixr 6 interpolateAppend -- matches (<>)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  infixr 6 `interpolateAppend` -- matches (<>)
```

Author: it works both ways, i believe

Reviewer: I think the parser rejects it if it isn't a plain symbol operator
<img width="602" height="123" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b8a63640-1510-4c49-b7ec-43575559f21b" />

Author: try infixr 9 id

Reviewer: <img width="585" height="104" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b86e64cd-d7ca-4d09-9fae-e026686102a0" />

Still doesn't work. I think you can leave out the numbers to force associativity but not precedence.
Incidentally you can see the backticks change the error:
<img width="970" height="115" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dfeca3e0-5591-4c57-aa09-9b3f5b2e77a8" />

Reviewer: https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/syntax-iso.html 9.5 (ctrl+f fixity)
<img width="667" height="173" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3f8f3f32-3cf8-4275-9e71-d54c1caef0db" />
<img width="754" height="139" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7bd386c9-eaac-4b93-ac1c-bd817ff9ac49" />

I think sym = symbol and id = not a symbol? This would match what I think and the error says, `` to turn a variable into an operator and this doesn't apply to an already-operator, the same as in an expression.

Author: hm I swore I tried it. I'll make the change then

  interpolateEmpty :: Monoid s => s
  interpolateEmpty = mempty

  interpolateFinalize :: Interpolator s => InterpolatorBuilderFor s -> s
  interpolateFinalize = buildInterpolator

  {----- Classes -----}

  class
    ( InterpolatorBuilder (InterpolatorBuilderFor s)
    ) => Interpolator s where
    type InterpolatorBuilderFor s
    buildInterpolator :: InterpolatorBuilderFor s -> s

>   class (IsString b, Monoid b, Interpolator b) => InterpolatorBuilder b where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  class (IsString b, Monoid b) => InterpolatorBuilder b where
```
The constraint leads to undecidable superclasses and I'm not sure what it gets you.

Author: it allows using s"..." in `interpolate`. i tested that it works with UndecideableSuperClasses, is there a downside to using it?

Reviewer: I guess it's a matter of taste, the committee might not like it. I'm testing the interpolation instance now.
Edit: I think it works so feel free to resolve this. It might be worth pointing out to the committee that this is an Undecidable Superclass and that it generally will only have two instances in the cycle because the builder's builder is normally itself with `build = id`.

    interpolateString :: String -> b

>     interpolateString = fromString

Reviewer: Can this differ from `fromString`? I can only guess at something exotic like quoting vs not quoting strings?

Incidentally this is somewhere that differs fro my suggested writer idea, this gives the interpolation class power over how primitives are interpolated that can differ from `fromString . interpolate` (whether or not that's a good idea I don't know).

Reviewer: Is the point of this method that you can have `s"example"` do something different to `let s = "example" in s"${s}"` ?
E.g. perhaps ${ } escapes strings for some specific interpolation result type (e.g. a command line to call)?

Reviewer 21: drawing from the SQL motivation again: for `SQL.s` I would expect the former to be unwrapped literal `example`, and the latter an SQL-quoted string `'example'`. so in general, quoting vs. not quoting doesn't strike me as exotic!

Reviewer: Yes I think I didn't initially see the motivation but I do much more now. This also relates to how the instances are set up for the built-in `Interpolate` e.g. consider `s"${["asdf"]}" = "[asdf]"` (a bit odd vs `["asdf"]`). But direct embedding is what you want a lot of the time when writing text (`putStrLn s"Hello ${name}!"`). Perhaps either we need specifiers or some kind of raw or different embedding (e.g. in another comment I was considering `s"$${builder}"`, but that idea wouldn't work with text in place of builder).

Reviewer 21: hm, good point. I had already been thinking that `SQL.Column` should behave differently: how/whether to quote those can vary by backend, but it's always different from plain strings. this could just use a newtype; maybe it should be newtypes all around (thus e.g. `SQL.String` distinct from `Prelude.String`) if you want anything but the raw string value. and of course with `base` only, there's the option of `s"${show str}"` if you want the quotes.

Reviewer: It's also not like `fromString` or `interpolateString` know if you're escaping it or not, and for many instances (e.g. the [] example, or `Maybe` if it uses `Just`) you want to decide. What about something like this? [the defaultPrec concept needs a lot of work]
```Haskell
class
  ( InterpolatorBuilder (InterpolatorBuilderFor s)
  ) => Interpolator s where
  type InterpolatorBuilderFor s
  buildInterpolator :: InterpolatorBuilderFor s -> s

  defaultPrec :: Int - defaults to pRaw, might have to be pRaw for builders

class (IsString b, Monoid b, Interpolator b, Interpolate b) => InterpolatorBuilder b where
  -- only truly important change is escape has unambiguous behaviour instead of interpolateString
  -- fromString must be raw.
  escape :: b -> b -- instead of the string version
  parens :: b -> b -- not sure if this is worth it over fromString "(" <> .. <> fromString ")"?

class Interpolate a where
  interpolatePrec :: InterpolatorBuilder b => Int -> a -> b
  -- interpolate: method removed due to easy misuse

  interpolateList :: InterpolatorBuilder b => Int -> [a] -> b
  -- required for Char to implement String.
  -- precedence still taken due to pRaw vs pQuote

pAexp :: Int = 11
pApp :: Int = 10
-- ...
pQuote :: Int = 0
pRaw :: Int = -1 -- new, could perhaps be retrofitted into Show also [but not the show/print default obviously.. in fact it could generalise putStr/Ln]

interpolateValue = interpolatePrec defaultPrec -- needs to handle ambiguous arg properly, alt. it could not specify it here and finalize could plug it in (append/empty would thread a function) or return (forall Interpolator b => ...), or builder could become one-to-one
quote = interpolatePrec pQuote
raw = interpolatePrec pRaw
```

So now `s"${str}"` does whatever the default for the interpolation type is [unless str is a builder.. still needs working out], `s"${raw str}"` is always raw, `s"${quote str}"` is always quoted. Anything trying to show as an atomic expression (e.g. `x` in `Just x`) should use `pAexp` and thus should be quoted, but if your implementation of showing a map wants to write the keys out raw it can do so without being forced to quote them (since it can choose to delegate to a lower precedence). This forces `Interpolator Builder` to have `defaultPrec = pRaw` to make sense. The alternative is the $${ idea (but I still think pRaw improves the class approach.. I think it's back to considering the desugaring or what to do with defaultPrec)

Author: Sorry, I haven't been able to jump online to answer this quickly enough. So I'll try to answer the various questions here:
* This isn't necessary, I can remove
* It's unrelated to using `s"..."` to implement `interpolate`
* SQL is irrelevant here; `SQL` would use its own qualified interpolator and its own `Interpolate` class
* The raw embedding is handled with the `Explicit` interpolator in the proposal
* `interpolatePrec` is going away

    interpolateIntegral :: (Integral a, Show a) => a -> b
    interpolateIntegral = fromString . show

    interpolateRealFloat :: (RealFloat a, Show a) => a -> b
    interpolateRealFloat = fromString . show

>   class Interpolate a where

Reviewer: One thing I noticed is that you can't write an efficient
`instance Interpolate Text`
You can interpolate builders, but you are forced to convert `Text` to a `String` to a `Builder` (this _might_ be covered by a rewrite rule, which might be reasonably likely to fire). I think my writer idea would work ok here (at least it could call some array copy routine from the old text to a new buffer) but again my writer idea doesn't give the interpolation result type freedom to reinterpret primitives.

Author: Correct, that's still a limitation. Your writer idea would solve it, but TBD on whether we'd go down that path

    {-# MINIMAL interpolate | interpolatePrec #-}

    interpolate :: (InterpolatorBuilder b) => a -> b
    interpolate = interpolatePrec 0

    interpolatePrec :: (InterpolatorBuilder b) => Int -> a -> b

>     interpolatePrec _ = interpolate

Reviewer 13: (I mentioned this in the CLC thread but probably it's worth discussing in this one.)

How do you expect `interpolatePrec` to be used? I don't think anything desugars to it.

People might try to use it in contexts like

```haskell
s"Just ${interpolatePrec 11 a}"
```

But that desugars to something involving `interpolate (interpolatePrec 11 a)`.

* I think the type of `interpolatePrec` isn't constrained enough for this to typecheck
* Even if it typechecked, is there anything ensuring that `interpolate (interpolate a)` would give the same result as `interpolate a`?

Another option is to have a type like you define for the `shows` stuff below

```haskell
data P a = P !Int !a
instance Interpolate a => Interpolate (P a) where
  interpolatePrec _ (P p a) = interpolatePrec p a

-- and then:
s"Just ${P 11 a}"
```

But if the intent is to have something like that, I'd expect it in the proposal instead of hoping it gets added later.

Reviewer 2: Say, you want to `interpolate` a tuple. Making `interpolate (x, y) = interpolate x ++ ", " ++ interpolate y` instance is just bad.

I.e. the reason is the same why `Show` class has `showsPrec` though you never really use that as end user.

What I wonder, is why we need `Prec`. Do we need it? For `Show` precedences have somewhat unambiguous definition (after all `Show` is expected to produce valid-ish `Haskell` code), but what are precedences for `Interpolate`. Wild west?

Reviewer: I was looking into laws following this, but am confused by the possibility of `s"str" != s"${"str"}"`. I thought of a potential use case for doing so - command line arguments might escape string-like values.

Here are two additional alternatives to `P` and the instance/law requirement:
1. Don't support interpolation syntax in this case.
   Use `fromString "Just " <> interpolatePrec 11 a` since all builders require `IsString` and `Semigroup`.

2. Introduce a second syntax `$${builder}` for skipping `interpolateValue` entirely and embedding as-is.
   `s"Just $${interpolatePrec 11 a}"`
   I'm not sure if this is common enough to justify, the two new use cases I thought of were
   1) The command line example above for avoiding escaping `s"cmd ${firstArg :: String} $${optionsBuilder :: Cmd.Builder}"` (`firstArg` is escaped, `optionsBuilder` is not)
   2) At the use site* with more specific types, `s"this is my int: ${i :: Int} bytes: $${B.bits i :: B.Builder}" :: ByteString`(the first might write `i` as decimal UTF-8, the second as raw bytes)
      \* Not in an interpolate instance where you need to be generic.

Reviewer: > Say, you want to `interpolate` a tuple. Making `interpolate (x, y) = interpolate x ++ ", " ++ interpolate y` instance is just bad.
> 
> I.e. the reason is the same why `Show` class has `showsPrec` though you never really use that as end user.
> 
> What I wonder, is why we need `Prec`. Do we need it? For `Show` precedences have somewhat unambiguous definition (after all `Show` is expected to produce valid-ish `Haskell` code), but what are precedences for `Interpolate`. Wild west?

The intention was to support compound types (constructor arguments, 11 is assuming something similar to show for atomic expressions that don't need parentheses. In fact I was looking into a class in the `pretty` package [perhaps the closest equivalent but quotes strings] and now I'm concerned it might need a parameter to tell it whether to quote or not too (or perhaps unquoted could be a higher precedence than atomic expression) - consider `interpolate (Just "asdf") = showString "Just asdf"`.  [Though the current proposal strangely doesn't have Just?] And it might need `interpolateList` (though that is `String`'s fault).

I think similar to the way that package puts it, it's supposed to be "show but prettier [and faster]" for conveniently embedding data. Or a way of meaningfully presenting the data in text that doesn't necessarily need to be syntax e.g. you could imagine `{a, b, c}` or `{a: b, c: d, e: f}` for sets and maps*. The most unambiguous interpolations are primitives and it might just be that Haskell data con syntax is the best or most consistent way of presenting ADTs the rest of the time (except when you have something specific in mind, like maybe `newtype Confirmation = Confirmation Bool`) might render as a checkmark or a cross.

\* But sometimes you do want to write `{asdf: val}` and not `{"asdf": val}`. Maybe this is a specifier problem and you want something like `${map:fmt}` where `fmt = Map.Spec{ separator = ": ", key_spec = Unquoted, val_spec = ... }` or something but that's a whole new can of worms.

Author: I actually realized this yesterday, and haven't gotten a chance to revise. `interpolatePrec` should be removed; precedence makes sense for `Show`, since you're constructing a syntactically correct Haskell expression, so precedence matters. It doesn't really make sense here, at least for now. I'm also removing instances for container types (e.g. Maybe, Either, List), since it's an open question as to what those should render as. We can add instances later when the community has found a good solution

    * - ``s"a ${User{a = 1}} b"``
      - Expressions containing braces (record)
    * - ``s"a ${s"c ${x} d"} b"``
      - Nested interpolation
    * - ``s"a ${1 :: Int}"``
      - Inline type annotation
    * - ``s"a ${x {- a -}} b"``
      - Inline comment
    * - ``s"Name: ${user.name}"``
      - OverloadedRecordDot

.. list-table:: **Invalid expressions**
    :align: left

    * - ``s"a ${} b"``
      - Expression is missing
    * - ``s"a ${=} b"``
      - Not a valid expression
    * - ``s"a ${let x =} b"``
      - Incomplete expression
    * - ``s"a ${{b} c"``
      - The second ``{`` is not a valid character to start an expression
    * - ``s"a ${b -- asdf} c"``
      - The rest of the string is commented out

Composite types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``Interpolate`` specifies a generic ``IsString s, Monoid s``, which allows composite types to stay within ``s``. If it were monomorphized to ``String``, instances that would only use ``fromString`` and ``<>`` would make unnecessary roundtrips through ``String``.

::

    data SrcLoc = SrcLoc
      { file :: FilePath
      , line :: Int
      , col :: Int
      }

    instance Interpolate SrcLoc where

>       interpolate SrcLoc{..} = s"${file}:${line}:${col}"

Reviewer: This doesn't work anymore without either requiring that the builder can be interpolated (which unfortunately means losing the builder) or going via String (in which case we need a fromString or something like that, and it could affect the semantics if you don't require that the defaults for the primitive interpolation methods are requirements on the behaviour). Again another place where rewrite rules might save us (at least I think the scale of the rewrites is lower than it was before, you just need it to notice `fromStringToBuilder . fromBuilderToString`).

Author: That's the point for the Interpolator superclass on InterpolatorBuilder. It should work, I think I tested it

Reviewer: I'll double check this, but I think people might be unhappy about an undecidable superclass

Reviewer: I think you're right, and this does avoid depending on rewrite rules too so feel free to resolve this.

  interpolateRaw :: String -> StringBuilder
  interpolateRaw = fromString

  interpolateValue :: Interpolate a => a -> StringBuilder
  interpolateValue = interpolate

  interpolateAppend :: StringBuilder -> StringBuilder -> StringBuilder
  interpolateAppend = mappend

  interpolateEmpty :: StringBuilder
  interpolateEmpty = mempty

  interpolateFinalize :: StringBuilder -> String
  interpolateFinalize = buildString

  {----- StringBuilder -----}

  newtype StringBuilder = StringBuilder (Endo String)
    deriving newtype (Semigroup, Monoid)
  instance IsString StringBuilder where
    fromString s = StringBuilder (Endo (s <>))

  buildString :: StringBuilder -> String
  buildString (StringBuilder (Endo f)) = f ""

  {----- Interpolation of values -----}

  class Interpolate a where
    interpolate :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s

  instance Interpolate String where
    interpolate = fromString
  instance Interpolate Char where
    interpolate c = fromString [c]

  instance Interpolate Int where
    interpolate = fromString . show
  instance Interpolate Double where
    interpolate = fromString . show
  instance Interpolate Bool where
    interpolate = fromString . show

> Types may implement ``Interpolate`` using ``IsString`` or ``Monoid``; see `Section 3.2 Composite types <#32composite-types>`_ for an example. The default interpolator will only ever use this as ``s ~ StringBuilder``, but this allows other qualified interpolators to reuse the built-in ``Interpolate`` class and avoid roundtripping through ``String`` in certain instances.

Reviewer 22: Please add a pointer to a subsection in Examples that illustrates these "certain instances", showing explicitly how the additional generality of the `IsString` result of `interpolate` is useful.  (Otherwise it could just return `String`.)

> Expansion

Reviewer 22: I would make 2.7 (overloaded strings) and 2.8 (qualified strings), which are currently separated from this expansion section, into subsections of "Expansion".  Both are very much variations of expansion.

~~~~~~~~~

With the machinery defined above, the following interpolated string desugars to the below expression:

::

  -- original string
  s"foo ${f a b} bar ${g x} baz ${name}"

  -- desugared
  interpolateFinalize $
    interpolateRaw "foo "   `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue (f a b)`interpolateAppend`
    interpolateRaw " bar "  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue (g x)  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateRaw " baz "  `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateValue name   `interpolateAppend`
    interpolateEmpty

Namely:

> * An ``istringRaw`` component expands to ``interpolateRaw "<istringRaw>"``

Reviewer 22: Whoa!  What is `istringRaw`?  What are the angle-brackets?

By grepping I see thar you are referring back to Section 2.2.  Please point directly, and explain your angle-bracket notation.  Perhaps it is obvious enough once the connection to 2.2 is made, so use your best judgement.

  * The string literal passed to ``interpolateRaw`` is a strict ``String`` literal, unaffected by ``-XOverloadedStrings``

* An ``istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose`` component expands to ``interpolateValue (<exp>)``

* The list of ``istring`` components between ``istringBegin`` and ``istringEnd`` expands to the expansion of the components, with ``interpolateAppend`` as "list cons" and ``interpolateEmpty`` as "list nil".

>   * ``interpolateAppend`` is always right-associative

Reviewer 22: What does "always" mean?   I think you may mean that *regardless* of the associativity of `M.interpolateAppend`, the generated code will be
```
interpolateFinalize $
  interpolateRaw "foo "   `interpolateAppend`
  (interpolateValue (f a b)`interpolateAppend`
  (interpolateRaw " bar "  `interpolateAppend`
  (interpolateValue (g x)  `interpolateAppend`
  (interpolateRaw " baz "  `interpolateAppend`
  (interpolateValue name   `interpolateAppend`
  interpolateEmpty)))))
```
Better to say that explicitly so we don't rely on the associativity at all.

Reviewer 22: (Unless you want instead to specify that we promise to parenthesise according to the associativity of `M.interpolateAppend`?  But that would impose some extra implementation constraints.)

    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Class.Experimental``
      - Defines the ``Interpolate`` class and instances as written in `Section 2.4 Machinery <#24machinery>`_
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Default.Experimental``
      - Defines the classes and functions for the default ``s"..."`` syntax, as written in `Section 2.4 Machinery <#24machinery>`_
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.Basic.Experimental``
      - Defines an interpolator that's the same as the default except interpolates values directly without automatic conversion with ``Interpolate`` (See `Section 10.3 Provided interpolator: Basic <#103provided-interpolator-basic>`_)
    * - ``Data.String.Interpolate.ShowS.Experimental``
      - Defines an interpolator useful for implementing ``showsPrec`` (See `Section 10.4 Provided interpolator: ShowS <#104provided-interpolator-shows>`_)

OverloadedStrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When ``-XOverloadedStrings`` is enabled, a final ``fromString`` is added after the ``interpolateFinalize`` call. This still constructs the string with ``StringBuilder`` -> ``String``, so users might prefer using ``-XQualifiedStrings`` instead.

QualifiedStrings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When ``-XQualifiedStrings`` is enabled, you may qualify string interpolation, where ``[modid.]s"..."`` desugars to the same expressions, except resolving the ``interpolate*`` functions as ``[modid.]interpolate*``. Some examples:

Reviewer 22: What if you have *both* OverloadedStrings *and* QualifiedStrings.  Do you get 
```
   Text.fromString $
    Text.interpolateFinalize $ ...
```
Or does QualifiedStrings simply ignore OverloadedStrings.  (I think the latter.)  Important to say so.

::

  Text.s"hello world"

  -- Desugars to:
  Text.interpolateFinalize $
    Text.interpolateRaw "hello world" `Text.interpolateAppend`
    Text.interpolateEmpty

::

  SQL.s"select * from users where name = ${Text.toUpper name} and age = ${age}"

  -- Desugars to:
  SQL.interpolateFinalize $
    SQL.interpolateRaw   "select * from users where name = " `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateValue (Text.toUpper name)                 `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateRaw   " and age = "                       `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateValue age                                 `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateEmpty

> It's highly recommended that every string type with an ``IsString`` instance provides at least one string interpolator reusing the built-in ``Interpolate`` class. That way, there's always an option to use ``MyString.s"..."`` if the user does not wish to globally enable ``-XOverloadedStrings``. This interpolator could simply be a monomorphized version of the default interpolator:

Reviewer 22: What is a "string type".  Better just to say "every type that has an `IsString` instance should *also* provide a `Interpolate` instance.

That begs the question of why we want `Interpolate` as well as `IsString`.  I think it's because of the generality of an `IsString` result?  Illustrated in Example XX?  Better to say explicitly so that the reader understands the "why" not just the "what".

Author: I renamed `s/string type/type/`.

Your suggestion is not accurate. This sentence isn't saying that every type `s` with an `IsString s` instance should also have `Interpolate s`; it's that every type `s` with an `IsString s` instance should include a module providing the interpolator functions (`interpolateRaw`, `interpolateValue`, etc.) that work with the built-in `Interpolate` class (that is, `interpolateValue` should have the type `Interpolate a => a -> MyString`).

The rest of the `QualifiedStrings` section explains the motivation for this.

I've pushed a commit addressing this and your other comments

Examples
--------

Parsing
~~~~~~~

.. list-table:: **Valid expressions**
    :align: left

    * - ``s"a ${x} b"``
      - Simple expressions
    * - ``s"a ${x + 1} b"``
      - Complex expressions
    * - ``s"a ${'{'} ${'}'} b"``
      - Expressions containing braces (char)
    * - ``s"a ${User{a = 1}} b"``
      - Expressions containing braces (record)
    * - ``s"a ${s"c ${x} d"} b"``
      - Nested interpolation
    * - ``s"a ${1 :: Int}"``
      - Inline type annotation
    * - ``s"a ${x {- a -}} b"``
      - Inline comment
    * - ``s"Name: ${user.name}"``
      - OverloadedRecordDot

.. list-table:: **Invalid expressions**
    :align: left

    * - ``s"a ${} b"``
      - Expression is missing
    * - ``s"a ${=} b"``
      - Not a valid expression
    * - ``s"a ${let x =} b"``
      - Incomplete expression
    * - ``s"a ${{b} c"``
      - The second ``{`` is not a valid character to start an expression
    * - ``s"a ${b -- asdf} c"``
      - The rest of the string is commented out

Composite types
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> ``Interpolate`` specifies a generic ``IsString s, Monoid s``, which allows composite types to stay within ``s``. If it were monomorphized to ``String``, instances that would only use ``fromString`` and ``<>`` would make unnecessary roundtrips through ``String``.

Reviewer 22: It's not clear (to me at least) how this example avoids "round trips through string".  Maybe explain a bit more.

I'd really like to see an example of  efficiently building a `Text` or `ByteString` value, via their "builder" types rather than going via String.  I think this possibility is the Main Reason for some of the generality.  Or have I misunderstood?

If Haskell had native string interpolation, it would have the benefit and safety of the current third-party quasiquotes without the need for Template Haskell, and be able to take advantage of features like `multiline strings <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/569>`_.
::

  error s"Expected: ${x + y}, got: ${result}"

  let textExample = s"${name1} (age: ${age1}) encountered ${name2} (age: ${age2})"

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

This proposal introduces the ``-XStringInterpolation`` extension, which includes syntax similar to ``-XQualifiedStrings`` (`proposal <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/723>`_).

High-level Overview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At its core, this proposal proposes the following functionality:

* The syntax ``s"age: ${age}"`` expands to a built-in implementation hardcoded to ``String`` and a new ``Interpolate`` type class with an ``interpolate :: a -> String`` function.

>     * ``-XOverloadedStrings`` does not affect this expression at all

Reviewer 6: So under `-XOverloadedStrings -XStringInterpolation`, `s"age" :: String` but `"age" :: IsString s => s`? This seems strange to me. Why not say that `fromString` gets applied to the overall result of the interpolation? (This could do with some discussion under "Effect and Interactions".)

Author: Yes, that asymmetric is a sad consequence of the updated proposal.

The main problem with making it polymorphic: should it be built up as a String with a final `fromString`, or should we immediately `fromString` and build up as `s`?

* Immediate `fromString` is faster for `Text`
* Final `fromString` is faster for `String` (since we can implement with `ShowS`)

Furthermore, making it polymorphic opens up the can of worms around "should `Interpolate` support going straight to `s` or interpolate via `String`?", where you have "performant non-string interpolations + NxM instances" or "non-performant non-string interpolations + N instances". Hardcoding to `String` sidesteps this whole discussion, such that the user doesn't even have to think about whether `s"..." :: Text` is performant or not; they're forced to use `T.s"..."`.

Reviewer 6: I see your point about polymorphism at the `Interpolate` level being problematic, so I'm on board with the current design of `Interpolate` that uses `String`, together with recommending qualified strings for performance-sensitive cases. But I still think it would be better to use a final `fromString` after the whole thing (i.e. `fromString (interpolateFinalize ...)`, where all the operations are as in the current draft) when `OverloadedStrings` is enabled. That ensures consistency between `"..."` and `s"..."`, and AFAICS the only downside is that it doesn't push the user as much towards qualified strings. If that's the only motivation, it would be better done with a warning or linter IMHO.

Reviewer 3: Unfortunately, I don't have much time to delve deeper into the new proposal (on holiday this week and on business trip next), but

> The main problem with making it polymorphic: should it be built up as a String with a final fromString

IMO, yes! It is a very simple, compositional specification, to the point it isn't even worth specifying. It might be inefficient, but if people want efficiency they should use the qualified implementation.

Also there is the possibility of implementing a rewrite rule framework. This is very reliable for intra module optimisations. It could yield the exact same code as the more "optimised" implementation you used to have.

Either way, I agree with Adam that removing `s` should be a no-op even with OverloadedStrings.

Author: Yeah, okay that's fair. I guess the concern previously was that we were designing the built-in string interpolation to be somewhat performant for other string types, but it still left a gap with `Interpolate` going via `String`, so it was in an awkward middle ground of being somewhat more performant than a naive `fromString` but not being a "proper" solution. If we just do the naive `fromString`, we still have a posture of "definitely not performant" and maintain symmetry with `Interpolate` only going through String.

Yeah, this sounds great. I'll make that change

* The syntax ``M.s"age: ${age}"`` expands to a user-defined implementation where the implementor of the module ``M`` has total control over the implementation

    * Same technique as ``-XQualifiedStrings``

* ``s"..."`` is exactly equivalent to ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental.s"..."``, where ``Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`` is a new module in ``ghc-experimental``.

Concretely, ``-XStringInterpolation`` enables the following syntax:

::

  s"a ${x + 1} b"

  -- Desugars to:
  interpolateFinalize $
    interpolateRawString "a " `interpolateAppend` 
    interpolateConvertValue (x + 1)  `interpolateAppend` 
    interpolateRawString " b" `interpolateAppend` 

>     interpolateEmpty

Reviewer 18: I have the impression that the discussion here has already settled on a monomorphic API, but I have strong opinion on this matter, and I want to try one more time to promote a class-based solution.

In my earlier comments, I presented the following example:
```haskell
data SrcLoc = SrcLoc{file :: Text, line :: Int, column :: Int}
instance (Interpolate s Text, Interpolate s Int, InterpolateTarget s) => Interpolate s SrcLoc where
  interpolate SrcLoc{file, line, column} = s"${file}:${line}:${column}"
```
You simplified the example with a newtype `URL` wrapping `Text`, and concluded that a polymorphic `Interpolate` class might also be desirable even without polymorphic string interpolation. That was a sharp observation.

I would summarise the proposal for a polymorphic `Interpolate` class as (P0) (P for "polymorphic"):
```haskell
class Interpolate s a where
  interpolate :: a -> s
```

However, I insist that we consider my original `SrcLoc` example, and see how the monomorphic string interpolation (as in the current proposal) does not support this use case.

The essence of the `SrcLoc` example is that we do not just delegate the interpolation of some newtype `A` to its underlying type `B`. Two interesting things happen here:
1. `SrcLoc` wants to introduce string fragments into the interpolation result;
2. `SrcLoc` wants to combine the interpolation of multiple subparts.

I actually expect most user instances for `Interpolate` fall into this category and require these two abilities. Therefore, I argue that the `interpolate*` functions should also be made polymorphic by introducing the following type class (P1a):
```haskell
class InterpolateTarget s where
  interpolateRawString :: String -> s
  interpolateAppend :: s -> s
  interpolateEmpty :: s
```
Of course, one might immediately see a problem with this type class: how do we implement an instance for `ShowS`, since `ShowS` is just a type alias to a bare function? My proposal is to introduce a newtype (name subject to bikeshedding) as an implementation detail:
```haskell
newtype StringBuilder = StringBuilder ShowS
instance InterpolateTarget StringBuilder where
  interpolateRawString = StringBuilder . showString
  interpolateAppend (StringBuilder x) (StringBuilder y) = StringBuilder (x . y)
  interpolateEmpty = StringBuilder id
```

If we want to go even further, we could define another type class (P2):
```haskell
class InterpolateResult s where
  type Builder s
  interpolateFinalise :: Builder s -> s
```

After we write out the `InterpolateTarget` class like this, I feel very tentative to define it in the following alternative way (P1b):
```haskell
type InterpolateTarget s = (IsString s, Monoid s)
```
This definition feels very natural and straightforward to me. However, I do recognise several potential problems:
1. `IsString ByteString` is arguably broken (haskell/bytestring#140);
2. chain of `(<>)` for `Text` or `ByteString` is not efficient;
3. qualified string interpolation loses three customisation points;

I do not know enough about advanced string interpolation that requires customising `rawString`, `append`, and `empty`, so I cannot comment on the third point. However, I do think that points 1 and 2 are not that problematic.

Regarding point 1, `IsString ByteString` truncates multi-byte characters, and I would argue that `ByteString` is therefore not a good target for string interpolation. However, if some use cases only deal with ASCII strings, it can still be used with caution. My point is that this is no more dangerous than the existing `IsString` instance, and if maintainers of `bytestring` figures out a way to fix the `IsString` instance, the string interpolation for bytestrings will also be fixed at the same time.

Regarding point 2, I do not think interpolating directly to `Text` or `ByteString` should be recommended anyway. Since there is a `finalise` function, interpolation of `Text` should definintely go through `Data.Text.Lazy.Builder.Builder`, and the type family in (P2) should make this unambiguous (I mean, when the result type is unambiguous).

To summarise my idea, I propose to have (P0) + (P1b) + (P2). To be clear, this of course does not preclude using qualified syntax, but `Data.Text` for example could simply reexport the standard interpolation mechanism. From a user's perspective, using the qualified syntax mostly serve one purpose: to disambiguate the result type of a string interpolation.

Between (P1a) and (P1b), I lean towards (P1b) for its clarity and simplicity. That said, I have no problem if we eventually settle with (P1a) for more flexible customisation in the qualified syntax.

I am also okay with only (P0) + (P1a/P1b) (without P2 the class for finalisation). Notice that even without (P2), my `SrcLoc` example is still supported. So if you feel strongly against `OverloadedStrings`-style features, then I think it is reasonable to have (P0) + (P1), with the following (M2a) (M for "monomorphic"):
```haskell
-- defined in `Data.String.Interpolate.Experimental`
interpolateFinalise :: StringBuilder -> String
interpolateFinalise (StringBuilder k) = k ""
```
Text interpolation then needs to rely on `Data.Text` providing its own `interpolateFinalise` and to adopt the qualified syntax. (I think this might be a good compromise.)

To opt out of the finalisation step in (M2a) (e.g., in my `SrcLoc` example), and get the polymorphic intermediate result, we could have additionally the following (M2b):
```haskell
-- defined in `Data.String.Interpolate.Polymorphic.Experimental`, optional
interpolateFinalise :: a -> a
interpolateFinalise = id
```
And users would import this module qualified and write the following:
```haskell
import qualified Data.String.Interpolate.Polymorphic.Experimental as P
polyEx :: (Interpolate s Int, InterpolateTarget s) => Int -> s
polyEx n = P.s"n = ${n}"
```

Author: I'm a bit confused, this sounds a lot like the option discussed under "Alternative - Polymorphic interpolable expansion" in the proposal. Can you specify what's different about your suggestion?

Reviewer 18: Right. I agree that my proposal is indeed similar to Alternative 2. I will summarise my points below:

1. There are use cases that require polymorphic string interpolation, and I expect most user instances to benefit from this;
2. We should put the interpolation functions themselves (`raw`, `append`, and `empty`) into a type class to support polymorphic use;
3. The aforementioned three functions could alternatively be replaced with `fromString` from `IsString`, `(<>)` from `Semigroup`, and `mempty` from `Monoid` (I consider this to be more idiomatic Haskell);
4. Most importantly, polymorphic `Interpolate` instances need to skip the `finalise` step, so `finalise` should not be in the same class;
5. To make the built-in string interpolation monomorphic, even with the class-based solution, we can hard code `finalise` to only produce `String`;
6. If we do (5), we can provide a module exporting `finalise = id` to get back the polymorphic semantics using the qualified syntax.

I think the most important point is (1). We really need to provide a class for interpolation in `base` which packages like `text` can agree on and reuse. When user defines instances for their custom types, it is unreasonable (tedious and error-prone) to repeat the same instance multiple times for `String`, `StrictText`, `LazyText`, etc.

Another important point is (4) and (5). We can have both the polymorphic API and the monomorphic result. I think this is a good compromise.

Finally, a minor point: Alternative 2 uses a functional dependency between the builder and the text, so they must have a one-to-one correspondence. I think this is too restrictive, because the same builder could be used for both `LazyText` and `StrictText` (with only the finalisation step different). That said, I propose to separate `finalise` from that class (point 4, 5, 6 above), so it is probably irrelevant anyway.

#### Appendix: Boilerplate for the User under the Current Proposal

Perhaps `String` should be `ShowS` and `Text` should be `Builder`, but I think the point is clear.

```haskell
instance Interpolate String SrcLoc where
  interpolate SrcLoc{file, line, column} = s"${file}:${line}:${column}"

instance Interpolate StrictText SrcLoc where
  interpolate SrcLoc{file, line, column} = T.s"${file}:${line}:${column}"

instance Interpolate LazyText SrcLoc where
  interpolate SrcLoc{file, line, column} = TL.s"${file}:${line}:${column}"
```

Author: Yes, thanks for your insights! I think I've captured it in the latest revision + my latest comment. Thanks a bunch!

* An ``istringExprOpen exp istringExprClose`` component expands to ``interpolateConvertValue (<exp>)``
* The right-associated list of ``istring`` components between ``istringBegin`` and ``istringEnd`` expands to the expansion of the components, with ``interpolateAppend`` as "list cons" and ``interpolateEmpty`` as "list nil".

Qualified string interpolation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Similar to ``-XQualifiedStrings``, you may qualify string interpolation:

::

  Text.s"hello world"

  -- Desugars to:
  Text.interpolateFinalize $
    Text.interpolateRawString "hello world"

::

  SQL.s"select * from users where name = ${Text.toUpper name} and age = ${age}"

  -- Desugars to:
  SQL.interpolateFinalize $
    SQL.interpolateRawString "select * from users where name = " `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateConvertValue (Text.toUpper name)              `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateRawString " and age = "                       `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateConvertValue age                              `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateEmpty

> This syntax does not require ``-XQualifiedStrings``, only ``-XStringInterpolation``. It doesn't enable ``-XQualifiedStrings`` for normal string literals, only interpolation strings. While asymmetrical, since ``s"..."`` only works with ``String``, it's highly likely that most uses will use qualified syntax, so we enable it with only ``-XStringInterpolation``.

Reviewer 6: How about having `StringInterpolation` imply `QualifiedStrings`, so users need only enable `StringInterpolation` to get both? Then `QualifiedStrings` can continue to control both `M."..."` and `M.s"..."` syntax?

It seems odd that with `StringInterpolation` alone, `M.s"foo"` would work but `M."foo"` will not. I think as a design principle it would be good to ensure that if a string interpolation does not contain variables, the "redundant" `s` can always be removed without changing whether the program is accepted or the type of the expression.

Author: Yeah, that's an option too, but it also feels odd that turning on `s"..."` turns on `M."..."`, e.g. if you only care about string interpolation, but not qualified strings (either interpolated or not)

Reviewer 3: I agree with Adam here. If StringInterpolation implies QualifiedStrings, then it is no surprise that it enables QualifiedStrings as well. If users don't want that, they can explicitly turn off QualifiedStrings and lose qualified interpolations in doing so. Consistent.

Author: With the conclusion from the other thread, I will be enabling `-XOverloadedStrings` in conjunction with `-XStringInterpolation`, which makes it more likely that non-qualified `s"..."` will be used, so I will go back to requiring `QualifiedStrings` for `M.s"..."` syntax, without automatically enabling syntax

  {----- Implementation of s"..." -----}

  interpolateRaw :: String -> StringBuilder
  interpolateRaw = fromString

  interpolateValue :: Interpolate a => a -> StringBuilder
  interpolateValue = interpolate

  interpolateAppend :: StringBuilder -> StringBuilder -> StringBuilder
  interpolateAppend = mappend

  infixr 6 `interpolateAppend` -- matches (<>)

>   interpolateEmpty :: StringBuilder

Reviewer: My comments are really about finalize here, but is there a need to specialise the rest to `StringBuilder`?

Author: `interpolateFinalize`, yes. I think it's simpler for the default `s"..."` to just use the String implementation, and `Text` can expose its own interpolator that still reuses the built-in `Interpolate` class.

The others I could generalize again

Reviewer: I guess you can resolve this, since it's really just downstream from my other comment about finalise. If it remains as ShowS there's no need to generalise it, if it doesn't it will need generalising anyway.

  interpolateEmpty = mempty

>   interpolateFinalize :: IsString s => StringBuilder -> s

Reviewer: I don't like `ShoWS` for everything, I thought the interpolator class with the builder as an associated type for finalise was perfect as it was (whether or not there's a separate builder class). I would test what happens with the two approaches with an instance (including a recursive one) in another module and whatever appropriate inline/specialise pragmas.

I think there would be no point in the built in class or syntax (except with `RebindableSyntax`) if it only worked well for `String`.

Author: If this benchmark could be trusted, it's actually not terrible to build Text via ShowS:
https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/570#discussion_r3254739202

Reviewer: I haven't been able to see the linked comment, it might be going to a collapsed or unloaded thread. Do you know which thread it is under? I've found one related comment about benchmarks you've made recently with this https://gist.github.com/brandonchinn178/ded11b09b6ca36a5f319203e6e95c3bc the problem is it doesn't use classes and instances with generic types across modules (nevermind anything recursively) so it's assuming everything inlines specialises and rewrites (which it might not).

Author: Yeah, GitHub makes it annoying to find a collapsed thread. Here's a direct link: https://gist.github.com/brandonchinn178/ded11b09b6ca36a5f319203e6e95c3bc

Reviewer: Also, is it still possible to use interpolation syntax to define `Interpolate` instances? Does it force it to collapse the builder into a string and back to a builder again? (If some laws tied this down maybe not so bad since the rewrite could be generic)

Author: Technically, it would be possible with `OverloadedStrings`, but you probably dont want to, as it would go through String

You could do it with `Explicit.s"..."` though

Reviewer: ~~I think a rewrite rule would fire reliably in specific scenario, since GHC can see `fromString @StringBuilder . buildString` with no specialisation needed (the types are fixed) and no inlining needed (it can be optimised in the definition of the method directly). Maybe it's worth adding the re-write rule to the proposal?~~
This isn't the case, I was thinking that interpolate had been monomorphised. It's still generic, so it's `fromString @s . buildString` for any `s`. So it still depends on specialisation.

I think the jury is still out on the general non-string performance though especially when you factor in cross package or cross module possibly recursive instances. Maybe I am too optimistic about the possibility of a general interpolation class though.

Reviewer: One thing I hadn't noticed previously is that at least `Interpolate` still doesn't force it to go via `ShowS`. So you're right the interpolate class can still be re-used.

  instance IsString StringBuilder where
    fromString s = StringBuilder (Endo (s <>))

  buildString :: StringBuilder -> String
  buildString (StringBuilder (Endo f)) = f ""

  {----- Interpolation of values -----}

  class Interpolate a where

>     interpolate :: (IsString s, Monoid s) => a -> s

Reviewer: Not sure on the removal of precedence and any ADT handling. I don't necessarily think the Show approach is always wrong for displaying data (it's clearly not always correct e.g. we often want raw strings or `{a,b,c}` rather than `fromList [a,b,c]`), it's a sensible default for ADTs and not having prec makes that difficult unless you go via `Show`. FWIW with the idea I was coming up with for `quote`/`raw` via precedence in the discussion with @akhra, I realised the newtype concepts @akhra (and independently @ChickenProp) had solve the problems I was having of avoiding [re]escaping the result of raw/quote.

Author: No, the Show approach is not always wrong; `Int`/`Double`/`Bool` are implemented with `Show`!

But I hesitate to rely on `Show` more for ADTs. I strongly believe people abuse `Show` already for pretty printing, and I don't want to add another reason to do so

Reviewer: Yes, but what I'm saying is the version without precedence forces you to use show when you need precedence. E.g. if you want to show `Just x`, you need to show x as an atomic expression. You don't want `"Just " <> interpolate x`. And you probably don't want `"Just (3)"` by always parenthesising. So either you fallback to `Show` or need precedence in interpolate.

I think the precedence based show behaviour is fine for ADTs as a default. I'm not saying that it should re-use `Show` instances, but that it should re-use the precedence behaviour for most ADTs (again, except where there's some prettier unambiguous non-syntactic rendering like for sets). I'm not sure how it would ever be different without some super general `interpolateConstructor :: String -> [Builder] -> Builder`. Plus there's another complexity in doing precedence very differently from `Show`.

Another example where you might want to render something differently is `Ordering`, you might want `<` `=` `>` rather than `LT` `EQ` `GT`. So `s"${a} ${compare a b} ${b}"` is e.g. `"3 < 5"`. Here this departs from precedence however (you would need to be wary of `s"${a} < ${LT}"`) so maybe more thought is needed.

Author: So precedence makes sense with Show because Show is intended to render a syntactically correct Haskell expression, so you need precedence in order to accurately render it. Interpolate has nothing to do with parse trees, so the API should not hardcode precedence in it.

I don't think `"Just " <> interpolate x` is what you want anyway. Since String interpolates without quotes, interpolating `Just "my text"` would render as `Just my text` even with precedence. So if you actually want to show the ADT, I think you _should_ use `show`. As an example, I think `Map` would best be rendered as
```hs
interpolate kvs = braces . intercalate ", " $
  [ show k <> ": " <> show v
  | (k, v) <- Map.toList kvs
  ]
  where
    braces s = "{" <> s <> "}" 
```
IMO you should actually use `show` because `Map` wants to say THIS haskell value is the key/value. Using your example, it would look odd for `Map Ordering String` to be `{>: my text here, =: other text}`

Reviewer: I'm not saying the default should be that way, but it is a way in which people will want to render maps and sets (I have absolutely needed this before), e.g. you have extra domain knowledge that it's a set of variable names and escaping the names makes it worse and not better [or more broadly: it might be syntax from a different language].  (Obviously for Map/Set that would be a situation where you either need specifiers, module functions or wrapper types to process it.) 

I see the point behaviour wise that you can always go via `show`*, but if this can't fail to rewrite/specialise and lead to performance problems why do people have concepts like `TextShow` at all?

\* Here to get what I want with in certain cases the keys/values you would need an improper show, which isn't the end of the world.

Author: I'm not understanding. Can you provide an example where precedence is necessary to have in the class, instead of just internally tracking precedence for an `Interpolate MyType` instance?

Reviewer: I've done some thinking and have some points and concepts for alternatives but they need more consideration. Basically all of these relate to generic instances for ADTs and containers (but perhaps also wrappers doing something special with the interpolation result). There are two additional downsides:

1. If you hang instances off of `Show` you're currently getting bottlenecked through `String` if we find out `StringBuilder` in the proposal today is a bottleneck (it seems very unlikely you will be appending in the builder through rewrite rules).

2. To use your point against you, if you define 3 ADTs you need 3 separate internal `interpolatePrec` functions in order to provide all 3 with instances that don't allow specifying the precedence. Almost any ADT or even an AST is going to want precedence. And unless you had an `InterpolatePrec` class you're not going to be able to derive an efficient version (if you did, it would need wrappers or extra instances for plain `Interpolate` types).

Going back to ADTs, consider the fact there is no instance for list in the proposal, even though list for non-char elements is probably the least controversial, aside from how it renders the elements. E.g. consider something like a variable name vs a `Maybe String` vs a string. You probably want interpolate for the first one (unless it is a not strictly proper show) but show the latter two. The second one probably interpolates as it shows, so no problem there. But you get undesirable results for the first or third.

Addressing 1 and 2, `Show` could gain a new defaulted `readPrec :: ReadP a` (and `readListPrec`) like method that is generic in the returned builder like `Interpolate`. (I still think it should be a new constraint combining `IsString` and `Monoid`, since there are potentially optimised methods that make the most sense for building but don't make much sense on all final string types.). Deriving could be updated to use it which would give you a bunch of instances for free.

What I think would solve the list issue is one of two things:
We decide on new predetermined precedences for interpolation for common cases (raw, quoted, list element, map key / value, ...) We add a way to tell the thing being interpolated to respect a Haskell precedence where possible, so it isn't interpolated as syntax, but interpolated as something that could display reasonably in that scenario,   perhaps by escaping, parenthesising or bracketing somehow... but if you want to solve 2, you need 1 + 1 optional precedence.

This also gets me thinking - but I'm not sure this is a great idea - of the possibility of adding interpolate into `Show`, defaulting to `show` as a Haskell expression [this could be part of a parameter to `ShowP a`]. So any `Show` type you would be able to say:
1. Show me this as a Haskell expression, precedence p.
2. Interpolate this with instance-specific precedence q, and try to squeeze it into Haskell precedence p (or no such requirement, which probably isn't the same as 0). This lets you build instances where you can still choose between interpolating or not, but now get to have ADTs etc work reliably without forcing Haskell syntax all the way through. 

2 could be re-used to generalise `putStr` and `putStrLn` (e.g. `putStrLn text` would just work, not that it's the most efficient) and perhaps this would lead to people abusing `Show` less. (The former might not be a good idea just given the name.). Showing a list would show elements, interpolating a list would interpolate elements but add a precedence 0 hind to indicate it should respect Haskell syntax to some degree (perhaps by quoting) e.g. not embed new commas into the list.

Author: That seems terribly convoluted and unnecessary. If you Show a value, then parse it and reinterpret it as an interpolated value, you're still going through String, and you're wrecking performance

Reviewer: > That seems terribly convoluted and unnecessary. If you Show a value, then parse it and reinterpret it as an interpolated value, you're still going through String, and you're wrecking performance

I'm not saying that (the `ShowP` thing I'm bringing up would be generic on the builder like interpolate is, `ReadP` is a custom parser type that is potentially more efficient than `String -> [(String, a)]`), in fact shortly I'm going to post a simple concrete alternative.

Reviewer: Here's something much more simple and concrete than my last comment. It basically only alters the current proposal by
1. Making `Show` a superclass, so every `Interpolate` has a show-like and an interpolate-like method
2. Adding a `Maybe Int` parameter to indicate you are going to use it in a Haskell precedence context
3. I've added StringBuilder in but of course this is an orthogonal concern. 

In terms of the user implementation of precedence problem:
1. If you are pretty printing a custom AST, this does not help you write the instances with your custom precedence - future specifier proposal probably.
2. If it is a Haskell-style show, it gives you the implementation for free. If it is a custom implementation that matches Haskell precedence, you can use the precedence when implementing it.

```Haskell
class (IsString b, Monoid b) => StringBuilder b where
  -- primitives go here
  -- may want fromShowS so you benefit from Show's ShowS use

class Show a => Interpolate a where
  -- Given optional Haskell precedence context [still interpolates in generic cases, but that instance will render itself differently to make sense there]
  interpolatePrec :: StringBuilder b => Maybe Int -> a -> b
  interpolatePrec = (fromShowS .) . showsPrec . fromMaybe 0

  -- String = [Char] duplicate interface curse
  -- use interpolate for elements, not show
  -- should this take precedence anyway?
  interpolatePrecList :: StringBuilder b => Maybe Int -> [a] -> b
  interpolatePrecList = Text.Read.showListWith (interpolatePrec (Just 0)) -- might not type check I haven't tested this

-- these ones need special implementations
instance Interpolate Char
-- for the Char list interpolation (String), being given a haskell precedence -> quote, not being given one -> don't quote. So interpolating Just "string" quotes, but interpolating "string" doesn't.
instance Interpolate a => Interpolate [a]
-- generics need implementations
instance Interpolate a => Interpolate (Maybe a) where
  interpolatePrec _ Nothing = s"Nothing"
  interpolatePrec mp (Just a) = showParen (maybe 0 (> 10) mp) s"Just ${a'}" where
    -- use interpolation logic for the element, but tell it you're using it where you would use an atomic Haskell expression
    a' = interpolatePrec (Just 11) a
-- basic ADTs don't if you want to show as-is
instance Interpolate Bool

-- possible future readPrec-like optimisation
-- newtype ShowP a = ShowP (forall b . StringBuilder b => Int -> a -> b)
-- class Show a
--   …
--   showPrec :: ShowP a = -- default to showsPrec
--   showListPrec :: ShowP [a] -- default to showListPrec
```

Reviewer: Use site example showing how this fixes the problem:
```Haskell
-- Invariant: the string is something variable name-like thus renders nicely in an atomic expression
--            even if it isn't strictly Haskell syntax.
data Var = Var String
  deriving (Show) -- show escapes and adds Var
instance Interpolate Var where
  -- interpolate does not escape or add Var regardless of the context
  interpolatePrec _ (Var a) = fromString a

-- show: No changes here:
showsPrec 10 "x" -- "x"
showsPrec 10 (Var "x") -- Var "x"
showsPrec 10 (Just "x") -- Just "x"
showsPrec 10 (Just (Var "x")) -- Just (Var "x")
showsPrec 10 [Var "x", Var "y"] -- [Var "x", Var "y"]

-- interpolate with a context (note Var is now not escaping, but String still is)
interpolatePrec (Just 10) "x" -- "x"
interpolatePrec (Just 10) (Var "x") -- x
interpolatePrec (Just 10) (Just "x") -- Just "x"
interpolatePrec (Just 10) (Just (Var "x")) -- Just x
interpolatePrec (Just 10) [Var "x", Var "y"] -- [x, y]
-- 11 would parenthesise Justs

-- interpolate without a context (note raw String no longer escapes,
-- but the one in Maybe String does - the instance gives it a context in the recursive call)
interpolatePrec Nothing "x" -- x
interpolatePrec Nothing (Var "x") -- x
interpolatePrec Nothing (Just "x") -- Just "x"
interpolatePrec Nothing (Just (Var "x")) -- Just x
interpolatePrec Nothing [Var "x", Var "y"] -- [x, y]
```

This fixes the problem I have with Map Set etc too, same way it fixes list [Map probably wouldn't use `> 10` but maybe `> 9`, since `{A B: C D, E F: G H}` is fine]. Strings used here would quote themselves just like the `Maybe` example, custom types can choose how to sensibly appear within such a context. This also addresses precedence ambiguity - it is Haskell / show precedence. No new precedence levels needed.

(Show performance is an orthogonal problem solvable by new defaulted methods returning builders like a `readPrec` analogue.)

Author: I think I'm gonna cut the conversation here.
* I definitely don't want to entwine Interpolate with Show in any form.
* I also don't think I'm going to budge on not implementing Interpolate on container types; Rust doesn't implement Display on Vec, Option, or Result, so there's prior art here.
* ~I still don't see a need for precedence. If `Interpolate [a]` wants to interpolate with Show, it can implement `instance Show a => Interpolate [a]` itself and use Show. I don't see a use case where interpolating with precedence would return a different value than Show would~

Reviewer: > I think I'm gonna cut the conversation here.
> 
> * I definitely don't want to entwine Interpolate with Show in any form.

Strictly speaking you can avoid a Show superclass, I wrote the previous post in a hurry since you replied when I was writing it. You just need the `Maybe Int` precedence and the list version (otherwise you can't have a generic version)

> * I also don't think I'm going to budge on not implementing Interpolate on container types; Rust doesn't implement Display on Vec, Option, or Result, so there's prior art here.

That seems like a seriously big limitation to the class given that just by having `Maybe Int` and a list method you can have it render nicely, escape or not escape based on the thing being used as an element. I'm going to write a quick mockup of this to send you.

Reviewer 26: As opposed to Show where precedence results in (), there is no such expectation when interpolating. Personally I think that trying to interpolate a Maybe value shouldn't be pre-defined - who knows what the purpose of the interpolation would be, and thus what makes sense to interpolate it as. Introducing precedence and parentheses for certain types makes the most sense when using specific output types and specific interpolated values.

Reviewer: Here's a demonstration, I only use show to quote and to print which thing is being interpolated before showing what it interpolates as. No superclass. I think this works well for containers.
https://godbolt.org/z/anPxva7hb

```Haskell
Program stdout
'c'                    c
"asdf"                    asdf
Var "x"                    x
["asdf","qwerty"]                    ["asdf","qwerty"]
[Var "x",Var "y"]                    [x,y]
Map [("x","a"),("y","b")]                    {"x": "a", "y": "b"}
Map [(Var "x",Var "a"),(Var "y",Var "b")]                    {x: a, y: b}
```

[Not included in the godbolt but here's an example with `Var` keys and `String` values]
`Map [(Var "x","a"),(Var "y","b")]                    {x: "a", y: "b"}`

@L0neGamer
The built in (unqualified) interpolate is generic in the result and has to be string-like.
It can't be used for e.g. binary data [unless it's the result of encoding string data].
It does not let you choose per output. So if there is going to be an instance at all, the ADT representation makes perfect sense when there isn't a sensible "nice" representation. Again it is up to whoever writes the interpolate instance.
If you want to do something special with `Maybe` like interpolate the value within without Just, that should be either a use of `maybe`/`fromMaybe` OR a future specifier suggestion.

[None of this applies to qualified versions, which do whatever you want e.g. binary encoding, json, or something else.]

    SQL.interpolateValue age                                 `SQL.interpolateAppend`
    SQL.interpolateEmpty

When ``-XQualifiedStrings`` is enabled, ``@String`` is *not* included.

Qualified string interpolators should specify a fixity for ``interpolateAppend``, or else the default ``infixl 9`` fixity will be used.

> It's highly recommended that every string type with an ``IsString`` instance provides at least one string interpolator reusing the built-in ``Interpolate`` class. That way, there's always an option to use ``MyString.s"..."`` if the user does not wish to globally enable ``-XOverloadedStrings``. This interpolator could simply be a monomorphized version of the default interpolator:

Reviewer: Would we need a separate `OverloadedStringInterpolation` to be able to have `s""` be generic but `""` be monomorphic? Or `RebindableSyntax` compatibility.

Author: `RebindableSyntax` would be handled appropriately by `StringInterpolation`

I don't see a usecase for `s""` to be overloaded but `""` not

Reviewer: Yes, not a big use case. If RebindableSyntax is supported then that's already a way of doing it (import the module unqualified and enable RebindableSyntax). So you can resolve this if you want, it was mainly a question anyway.
